
=== PAGE 1 ===
Nested Learning: The Illusion of Deep Learning Architecture
Ali Behrouz , Meisam Razaviyayn, Peilin Zhong, and Vahab Mirrokni
Abstract
Over the last decades, developing more powerful neural architectures and simultaneously designing optimization
algorithms to effectively train them have been the core of research efforts to enhance the capability of machine learning
models. Despite the recent progresses, particularly in developing Language Models (LMs), there are fundamental challenges
and unanswered questions about how such models cancontinually learn/memorize, self-improve, and find effective solutions.
In this paper, we present a new learning paradigm, called Nested Learning (NL), that coherently represents a machine
learning model with a set of nested, multi-level, and/or parallel optimization problems, each of which with its own “context
flow”. Through the lenses of NL, existing deep learning methods learns from data throughcompressingtheir own context
flow, andin-context learningnaturally emerges in large models. NL suggests a philosophy to design more expressive
learning algorithms with more “levels”, resulting in higher-order in-context learning and potentially unlocking effective
continual learning capabilities. In addition to its neuro-scientific motivation, we advocate for NL by presenting three
core contributions: (1) Expressive Optimizers: We show that known gradient-based optimizers, such as Adam, SGD with
Momentum, etc., are in fact associative memory modules that aim to compress the gradients’ information (by gradient
descent). Building on this insight, we present other “more expressive" optimizers with deep memory and/or more powerful
learning rules; (2) Self-Modifying Learning Module: Taking advantage of NL’s insights on learning algorithms, we present a
sequence model that learns how to modify itself by learning its own update algorithm; and (3) Continuum Memory System:
We present a new formulation for memory system that generalizes the traditional viewpoint of “long-term/short-term
memory”. Combining our self-modifying sequence model with the continuum memory system, we present a continual
learning module, calledHope, showing promising results in language modeling, knowledge incorporation, and few-shot
generalization tasks, continual learning, and long-context reasoning tasks.
“We cannot solve our problems with the same
thinking we used when we created them!"
— Attributed to Albert Einstein
1 Introduction
For decades, AI research has focused on designing machine learning algorithms that learn from data (Pitts 1943; McCulloch
et al. 1948; McCulloch 1949; Samuel 1959) or experience (Sutton et al. 1998; Connell et al. 1999; Silver et al. 2025);
often by optimizing an objectiveL(𝜽) over parameters𝜽∈Θ with gradient-based methods. While traditional machine
learning techniques required careful engineering and domain expertise to design feature extractors, limiting their ability to
directly process and learn from natural data (LeCun et al. 2015), deep representation learning offered a fully automated
alternative to discover the representations needed for the task. Thereafter, deep learning has been an inseparable part of
the large-scale computational models with seminal success in chemistry and biology (Jumper et al. 2021), games (Silver
et al. 2016, 2018), computer vision (Krizhevsky et al. 2012; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), and multimodal and natural language
understanding (Achiam et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024a; Comanici et al. 2025).
Stacking of multiple layers, as it is done in deep learning models, provides the models with better expressive power in
representing complex features, and more internal computations (e.g., #FLOPS) (Montúfar et al. 2014; Poole et al. 2016;
Hestness et al. 2017), all of which are critical and desirable characteristics for static tasks that require in-distribution
predictions over an a-priori fixed set. This deep design, however, is not a universal solution to all the challenges and
cannot help the expressive power of the models in multiple aspects, for example: (i) The computational depth of deep
models might not change with more layers (Merrill et al. 2022; Sanford et al. 2024), leaving their ability to implement
complex algorithms untouched compared to traditional shallow approaches (Merrill et al. 2024); (ii) The capacity of some
class of parameters might show marginal improvement with increasing the depth/width of the model (Kaplan et al. 2020);
(iii) The training process might converge to a suboptimal solution, mainly due to the suboptimal choice of the optimizer
§Correspondence to:{alibehrouz, razaviyayn, mirrokni}@google.comandpeilin.zhong@columbia.edu.
§A version of this work is published at Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 2025.
1
arXiv:2512.24695v1  [cs.LG]  31 Dec 2025
=== PAGE 2 ===
Figure 1: The uniform and reusable structure as well as multi time scale update in the brain are the key components to
unlock the continual learning in humans. Nested Learning (NL) allows for multi time-scale update for each component
of the brain, while showing that well-known architectures such as Transformers are in fact linear layers with different
frequency updates.
or its hyperparameters; and (iv) The model’s ability to fast adapt to a new task, continually learn, and/or generalize to
out-of-distribution data might not change with stacking more layers and requires more careful designs.
The core part of the efforts to overcome the above challenges and to enhance the capability of deep learning models
concentrate on: (1) developing more expressive class of parameters (i.e., neural architectures) (Fukushima 1980; Schmidhuber
et al. 1997; Krizhevsky et al. 2012; Vaswani et al. 2017; Behrouz et al. 2025c); (2) introducing objectives that can better
model the tasks (Rumelhart et al. 1986; Kingma et al. 2014b; Hjelm et al. 2019; Goodfellow et al. 2020; Alshammari et al.
2025); (3) designing more efficient/effective optimization algorithms to find better solutions or with more resilience to
forgetting (Kingma et al. 2014a; Gupta et al. 2018; Farajtabar et al. 2020; Jordan et al. 2024); and (4) scaling the model size to
enhance its expressivity, when the “right” choice of architecture, objective, and optimization algorithms are made (Brown
et al. 2020; Kaplan et al. 2020; Hoffmann et al. 2022). Collectively, these advancements and new findings on scaling patterns
of deep models have established the foundations upon which Large Language Models (LLMs) have been built.
The development of LLMs marks a pivotal milestone in deep learning research: a paradigm shift from task-specific models
to more general-purpose systems with various emergent capabilities as a result of scaling the “right” architectures (Brown
et al. 2020; Schaeffer et al. 2023). Despite all their success and remarkable capabilities in diverse sets of tasks (Nijkamp et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2023; Comanici et al. 2025), LLMs are largely static after their initial deployment phase, meaning that
they successfully perform tasks learned during pre- or post-training, but are unable to continually acquire new capabilities
beyond their immediate context. The only adaptable component of LLMs is theirin-context learningability–a (known to be
emergent) characteristic of LLMs that enables fast adaption to the context and so perform zero- or few-shot tasks (Brown
et al. 2020). Beyond in-context learning, recent efforts to overcome the static nature of LLMs either are computationally
expensive, require external components, lack generalization, and/or might suffer from catastrophic forgetting (Akyürek
et al. 2024a; Eyuboglu et al. 2025; yu et al. 2025), which has led researchers to question if there is a need to revisit how
to design machine learning models and if a new learning paradigm beyond stacking of layers is required to unleash the
capabilities of LLMs in continual setups.
Current Models only Experience the Immediate Present.As an analogy and to better illustrate the static nature of
LLMs, we use the example of anterograde amnesia–a neurological condition where a person cannot form new long-term
memories after the onset of the disorder, while existing memories remain intact (Scoville et al. 1957). This condition limits
the person’s knowledge and experiences to a short window of present and long past–before the onset of the disorder–which
results in continuously experiencing the immediate present as if it were always new. The memory processing system of
current LLMs suffer from a similar pattern. Their knowledge is limited to either, the immediate context that fits into their
context window, or the knowledge in MLPs that stores long-past, before the onset of“end of pre-training. ”This analogy, has
motivated us to take inspiration from neurophysiology literature and how brain consolidate its short-term memories.
2
=== PAGE 3 ===
1.1 Human Brain Perspective and Neurophysiological Motivation
Human brain is highly efficient and effective when it comes to continual learning, which is often attributed to neuro-
plasticity—the brain’s remarkable capacity to change itself in response to new experiences, memories, learning, and even
damage (Pascual-Leone et al. 2005; Johnston 2009). Recent studies support that the formation of Long-term memory
involves at least two distinct but complementary consolidation processes (Frey et al. 1997; Goto et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2024):
(1) A rapid “online” consolidation (also known as synaptic consolidation) phase occurs immediately or soon after learning,
even during wakefulness. This is when new and initially fragile memory traces are stabilized and begin transferring from
short-term to long-term storage; (2) An “offline” consolidation (also known as systems consolidation) process repeats the
replay of the recently encoded patterns—during sharp-wave ripples (SWRs) in the hippocampus, coordinated with cortical
sleep spindles and slow oscillations—strengthens and reorganizes the memory and supports transfer to cortical sites (Foster
et al. 2006; Ji et al. 2007; Peyrache et al. 2009).
Coming back to the analogy of anterograde amnesia, evidence indicates that the condition can impact both stages, but
especially the online consolidation phase, mainly due to the fact that hippocampus is the gateway for encoding new
declarative memories, and so its damage means new information never will be stored in long-term memory. As mentioned
above, the design of LLMs, and more specifically Transformer-based backbones, suffers from a similar condition after the
pre-training phase. That is, the information provided in the context, never impacts the long-term memory parameters
(e.g., feedforward layers), and so the model is not capable of acquiring new knowledge or skill, unless the information is
still stored in the short-term memory (e.g., in-context or attention). To this end, although the second stage is equally, or
even more, crucial for the consolidation of memories, and its absence can damage the process and might cause loss of
memory (Drummond et al. 2000; Yoo et al. 2007), in this work, we focus on the first stage: memory consolidation as an
online process. As discussed earlier, the memory processing, its online consolidation, and so continual learning ability of
humans are known to be highly relied on the neuroplasticity as well as neural oscillations (Bliss et al. 1993; Buzsaki et al.
2004; Klinzing et al. 2019).
Multi Time scale Processing System.Brain oscillations (also known as brainwaves)–a rhythmic fluctuations in brain
activity–is not mere byproducts of brain function but is increasingly understood to play a crucial role in various cognitive
functions such as attention, memory, and decision-making, and to be a core mechanism for organizing neural computation,
coordinating communication between brain regions, and gating the synaptic plasticity that underlies learning and memory
(Fell et al. 2011; Cavanagh et al. 2014; Fries 2015). These brainwaves are the results of the brain coordinating its computations
in different timescales and frequency updates, where each frequency determines how often groups of brain neurons become
active and share updated information. More specifically, such neural oscillations are typically categorized into distinct
frequencies, each of which has been associated with different cognitive functions and, critically, different timescales of
information processing: ranging from (1) fast Gamma waves (frequency of30-150Hz) that are mainly associated with
sensory information to (2) Beta waves (frequency of13-30Hz) that are mainly associated with active thinking (Buzsaki
et al. 2004; Buschman et al. 2007; Lundqvist et al. 2016), and (3) slow Delta and Theta waves (frequency of0 .5-8Hz),
mainly responsible for memory consolidation and learning (Marshall et al. 2006; Diekelmann et al. 2010; Ngo et al. 2013;
Staresina et al. 2015; Heusser et al. 2016; Daume et al. 2024).
In deep learning models, however, the weights of the architectures are fixed at test time and also it is common in pre-training
to use the same update rate for all the blocks/layers in the model. Later, in Section 6, however, we show that in-context
learning provides an extreme case of this design and in fact, Transformer architectures are based on two extreme frequencies
of update: i.e.,∞and0for attention and MLP blocks, respectively.
Brain’s Uniform and Reusable Structure.As discussed earlier, neuroplasticity is the brain’s remarkable capability to
change itself in response to new memories, knowledge, and even damage (Pascual-Leone et al. 2005; Johnston 2009). This
characteristic suggests a uniform architecture where neural elements are not rigidly dedicated to one function but are
instead reusable, capable of being flexibly redeployed to support different cognitive needs. One real-world example of
neural reusability is hemispherectomy–the surgical removal or disabling of one cerebral hemisphere, usually to alleviate
severe epilepsy. Amazingly, if this surgery is done in childhood, patients can lead largely normal lives into adulthood with
high functioning cognition and intact neural network organization that contains all the same core brain networks present
in a typical two-hemisphere brain (networks for language, vision, etc.). This extraordinary outcome provides real-life proof
of the brain’s uniform architecture. That is, even half a brain can reallocate resources and reorganize so that the person
can function extremely well. Such cases, along with documented instances of individuals living relatively normally with
missing pieces of cortex, highlight the brain’s uniform and reusable structure.
3
=== PAGE 4 ===
Figure 2: Nested Learning Paradigm that represent a machine learning model and its training procedure as a set of nested
optimization problems. (Left) An example of Hybrid architecture. While deep learning perspective, as the flattened image
of NL, does not provide insight about the depth of computation in the blocks, NL transparently represent all the inner
gradient flows. (Right) A Neural Learning Module: A computational model that learns how to compress its own context
flow. For example, the first level corresponds to the model’s most outer-loop training, often refer to as “pre-training” step.
Furthermore, this interpretation of brain’s uniform and reusable structure demonstrate that memory in human brain is not
an isolated system in some specific areas, and mainly is distributed across brain. That is, contrary to the traditional models
of memory that often implied that different types of memory reside in distinct brain structures (e.g. short-term memory in
frontal cortex vs. long-term memory in the hippocampus and cortex), modern research advocate for distributed neural
circuits memory processing across multiple regions (Christophel et al. 2017; Kitamura et al. 2017; Roy et al. 2022).
The modern deep learning architectures in recent years, however, at least on the surface, seem to be heterogeneous
and are based on a combination of a subset of self-attention variants (Vaswani et al. 2017), modern recurrent neural
networks (Katharopoulos et al. 2020; Schlag et al. 2021; Behrouz et al. 2025c; Peng et al. 2025b), canon layers (Allen-Zhu
2025), global convolutions (Hasani et al. 2023; Poli et al. 2023), and MLP blocks (Shazeer 2020). This raises the question
of whether we need a new uniform architecture, or if our beliefs about the heterogeneity of current models need to be
revisited.
1.2 Contributions and Roadmap
In this paper, we aim to present a unifying learning paradigm that not only provides new insights about existing algorithms,
methods, and architectures, but it also reveals a new dimension to stacking layers in deep learning with enhancement of
the computational depth, and continual learning ability of models. After discussing preliminary concepts and backgrounds
in §2, we present:
Nested Learning Paradigm (§3).To answer the questions raised above and to provide new insights on overcoming the
design challenges in continual learning, architecture design, and computational depth of modern deep learning models, we
present Nested Learning (NL)–a learning paradigm that allows each component of the machine learning model to have
its own internal gradient flow on its own context in multiple levels, representing a model and its learning process (i.e.,
optimization) as an inter-connected system of nested, multi-level, and/or parallel optimization problems. We argue that the
optimization process and the learning algorithms/architectures are fundamentally the same concepts but are in different
levels of a system with different context (i.e., gradient vs. tokens). Furthermore, they are two inter-connected components
where the learning algorithm/architecture generates the context for optimizers (i.e., the gradients), advocating for designing
architecture-specific optimizers. We discuss different ways of knowledge transfer between levels, resulting in unifying and
generalizing concepts like meta-learning, in-context learning, recurrent neural networks, hypernetworks, etc.
4
=== PAGE 5 ===
Optimizers and Architectures as Learning Module (§4, §5).Building on the NL’s viewpoint, we argue that traininga
deep neural networkwith backpropagation process and gradient descent is a compression and an optimization problem that
aims to train an associative memory to map layers’ inputs to their corresponding local error in the prediction. Accordingly,
we argue that pre-training is a form of in-context learning, where the context is the entire pre-training data and the layers
are compressing the context into their parameters. We demonstrate that such arguments are also valid for other popular
gradient-based optimizers and they are associative memories that aim to compress the gradients into their parameters.
From NL’s terminology, gradient-based optimizers such as gradient descent with momentum, Adam (Kingma et al. 2014a),
and AdaGrad (Duchi et al. 2011) can be decomposed into a two-level nested optimization problems, each of which is
optimized with a simple gradient descent. In particular, this viewpoint makes it apparent that for compressing the gradients,
in theory, Adam is the optimal associative memory with respect to the element-wise𝐿 2 regression objective.
We revisit previous findings on representing architectures as associative memories (Behrouz et al. 2025b) and decompose
their optimization process into a set of nested optimization problems, all of which optimized with gradient descent. Building
on the above findings–i.e., popular gradient-based optimizers and modern architectures are both a set of nested and/or
parallel optimization problems–we argue that the combination of these two–i.e., training an architecture with a specific
optimizer–can also be represented as a set of nested and/or parallel optimization problem. Therefore, a neural learning mod-
ule (a joint system of architecture and its training/optimization process) is a uniform model, in which all elements are linear
or deep MLPs, while they are optimizing their own internal objective in different levels with different frequencies.
Building upon the associative memory perspective of optimizers, we design a set of new learning updates (optimization
steps) with more expressive memory structure or memory management in compressing the gradients. In particular, we
argue that the choice of optimizer depends on the context of the optimization. A powerful optimizer for compressing
the gradients might not be the best choice for compressing the tokens. To this end, we present a new variant of gradient
descent, called Delta Gradient Descent (DGD), that its update not only depends on the current input, but also the state of
the weight of the neural network, resulting in capturing the dependencies of data samples without i.i.d. assumption.
Main Takeaways and Revisiting Common Terms: Continual and In-context Learning, Pre-Training, and
Learning (§6). We discuss the main takeaways of NL about principal concepts and revisit some common terms: (1) We
argue that continual learning can be viewed as a learning problem on a sequences of incoming contexts or episodes where
different levels are responsible for compressing their own in-context knowledge and transfer it to higher levels. Based on
this, we advocate for designing models and pipelines that do not rely on test/training phase, and rather continually manage
their knowledge and memory; (2) In-context learning is the characteristic of “having multiple nested levels”. Accordingly,
Transformers in-context learning comes from being a non-parametric solution to a certain regression objective on tokens,
while modern recurrent models uses parametric learning processes in their lower levels; (3) We further revisit other
terminologies such as learning/memorization, hybrid architectures, looped architectures, and learned optimizers.
Continuum Memory System, Self-Referential Titans, and Hope (§7, §8).We generalize the traditional viewpoint
of “long-term/short-term memory” (LSM) by presenting the Continuum Memory Systems (CMSs) and see memory as a
distributed inter-connected system with a spectrum of frequency updates. In this design, higher-frequency neurons are
responsible for fast adaption but store memories/knowledge for a short period of time, while lower frequency neurons are
responsible for more persistent knowledge. Comparing to LSM, we show that this multi-frequency design results in a
loop process for memory of the model, meaning that knowledge can partially be recovered when it is forgotten. While we
mainly design this memory system as a replacement of MLP blocks in Transformers, we take advantage of this intuition to
design Multi-scale Momentum Muon (M3) optimizer–an optimization algorithm with multiple momentum terms–further
supporting the importance of CMSs design in different contexts.
Evaluations (§9).To support the effectiveness of our proofs-of-concept as well as the importance of nested learning
design, we perform experimental evaluation on (1) Continual learning and in-context learning tasks including (i) learning
new language, (ii) class incremental learning, and (iii) question/answering on a new corpus; (2) Long context understanding
tasks, including needle-in-a-haystack (Hsieh et al. 2024) and BABILong (Kuratov et al. 2024) benchmarks; (3) Language
modeling and common-sense reasoning tasks; (4) In-context recall and memorization tasks; (5) Language recognition tasks;
and (6) comparing different optimizers, including our M3 optimizer. Our results indicate the effectiveness of NL viewpoint in
designing models with continual learning ability, having multiple levels of computations, and self-referential process.
5
=== PAGE 6 ===
2 Preliminaries
In this section we discuss the notations and review the background concepts.
Notations.We let 𝑥∈R 𝑁×𝑑 in be the input,M𝑡 represent the state of memory/modelM at time𝑡,Kbe the keys,Vbe the
values, andQbe the query matrices. We use bold lowercase letters with subscript 𝑡 to refer to the vector corresponds to the
input𝑡 (i.e.,𝒌𝑡,𝒗𝑡, and𝒒𝑡). We further refer to the distribution of any random variableT as𝑝(T) . Throughout the paper,
we use simple MLPs withLM≥ 1layers and residual connection as the architecture of the memory module M(·) . When
it is needed, we parameterized the memory module with𝜽M⊇{𝑊 1,𝑊 2,...,𝑊 LM}, which at least includes the parameters
of linear layers in the MLP. We use superscript with parenthesis to refer to parameters in differentlevelsof nested learning
(different update frequency): i.e., either by using level index𝑊(ℓ) or its corresponding frequency𝑊 (𝑓ℓ).
Gradient Descent.Gradient descent is one of the most widely used optimization algorithms for high-dimensional
problems, and its variants are standard tools for training large models. Given an objectiveL(·;·), the stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) with step size𝜂𝑡 >0(a.k.a. learning rate) updates parameters by:
𝑊𝑡+1 =𝑊 𝑡−𝜂𝑡∇𝑊𝑡L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙 𝒕),(1)
for data sample𝒙𝒕 from training set. The gradient descent formulation admits several equivalent characterizations that are
useful in analysis. One of those equivalent formulations is steepest-descent in the Euclidean metric, where one step of
gradient descent is equivalent to:
𝑊𝑡+1 =arg min
𝑊
n
⟨∇𝑊L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙 𝒕),𝑊⟩ + 1
2𝜂𝑡
∥𝑊−𝑊 𝑡∥2
2
o
,(2)
which is minimizing a first-order Taylor approximation regularized by a quadratic proximal term. The GD step above is
precisely a proximal update on the linearization ofL(· ;·) at𝑊𝑡, revealing an implicit bias toward small moves in𝐿2-distance.
Accumulating steps (with a constant learning rate𝜂) yields thefollow-the-regularized-leader(FTRL) form
𝑊𝑡+1 =arg min
𝑊
n  𝑡∑︁
𝑠=1
∇L(𝑊𝑠 ;𝒙𝑠),𝑊

+ 1
2𝜂∥𝑊−𝑊 1∥2
2
o
,(3)
whose solution is𝑊𝑡+1 =𝑊 1−𝜂 ˝𝑡
𝑠=1∇L(𝑊𝑠 ;𝒙𝑠). These two formulations are used in this paper interchangeably. However,
our discussions and formulations are generally valid for many other optimization algorithms as well.
Meta Learning.Designing an effective machine learning model often requires making decisions about its architecture
parameterized by𝜽∈Θ , objectiveL(𝜃) , and an optimizer, aiming to iteratively optimize the objective. Meta learning
paradigm (or learning to learn) (Schmidhuber et al. 1996; Finn et al. 2017; Akyürek et al. 2022; Irie et al. 2025a) aim to
automate a part of such decisions by modeling it as atwo-leveloptimization procedure, in which the outer model aims
to learn to set parameters for the inner procedure to maximize the performance across a set of tasks. That is, given an
objective parameterized by a parameterΦ: i.e.,ℓ(𝜽,D ; Φ), one can formalize the outer loop process as optimizing parameter
Φover a set of tasks:
Φ∗ =arg min
Φ
ET𝑖∼𝑝(T)
"
ℓ(𝜃,T𝑖 ;Φ)
#
,(4)
where𝑝(T) is the distribution of tasks. While initial studies on meta-learning used supervised settings for the outer
loop (Schmidhuber et al. 1996), recently, a more flexible family of methods that use an unsupervised process for the outer
loop has gained popularity (Finn et al. 2017; Brown et al. 2020; Akyürek et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022; Qu et al. 2025). In
addition to the growing interest to use meta learning methods for a diverse set of downstream tasks (Finn et al. 2017;
Munkhdalai et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2022; Irie et al. 2025a; Qu et al. 2025), in recent years, it also has shown popularity as a
paradigm to design powerful sequence models (Sun et al. 2024; Behrouz et al. 2025b,c).
Fast Weight Programmers (FWPs).Fast weight programmers (more recently refer to as linear Transformers) (Hinton
et al. 1987; Schmidhuber 1992; Ba et al. 2016; Schlag et al. 2021), which also have been motivated from neuroscience perspec-
tive (Gershman et al. 2025), are recurrent neural networks whose memory (or hidden state) ismatrix-valued: a time-varying
6
=== PAGE 7 ===
fast-weight matrixM𝑡∈R 𝑑out×𝑑key that serves as a short-term memory. A separate “programmer” (slow net) maps each
input𝒙𝑡∈R 𝑑in to query, key, and value vectors and updates the fast weights online. A basic (Hebbian/outer -product)
FWP—often calledvanillaFWP—update its parameters with:
M𝑡 =𝛼 𝑡M𝑡−1 +𝒗 𝑡𝜙(𝒌𝑡)⊤,(5)
and retrieve from memory with𝑦𝑡 =M 𝑡𝜙(𝑞𝑡), where𝜙(·) is an element-wise feature map (often applied to both keys and
queries). Unlike traditional RNNs or early variants of modern RNNs (Schmidhuber et al. 1997; Sun et al. 2023; Botev et al.
2024) with vector states, thematrix M𝑡 is the recurrent state; it iswrittenby rank -one update andreadby a matrix–vector
multiplication, providing a compact, learnable key–value memory with constant state size across time.
In-context Learning.The concept of “in-context learning” initially defined by Brown et al. (2020) as the ability of a
language model to leverage knowledge acquired during pre-training in order to infer and perform a new task solely based
on its context (e.g., few examples, or natural language instructions). This broad and general definition, which simply is
applicable for any language model with any architectural backbones and/or objective, later was formalized in a way that
only described in-context learning for Transformer architectures trained with next token prediction objectives. Accordingly,
despite extensive research on the algorithms/problems that a transformer-based model can learn in-context (Akyürek et al.
2022, 2024b; Zhang et al. 2024a; Dherin et al. 2025), the in-context learning as its general form is relatively underexplored.
Throughout this paper, we use the most general definition of “in-context learning” and refer to it as the ability of a
model to adapt itself to and learn from a given context. Our NL formulation connects ICL with the concept of associative
memory, offering a unified explanation for the ICL capabilities of models regardless of their architectural backbone and/or
objectives.
3 Nested Learning
This section discusses the motivations, formal definitions, and general high-level implications of Nested Learning (NL). We
start with a formulation of associative memory and then by using step-by-step examples, we build the intuition behind
architecture decomposition and its connection to modeling a neural network as an integrated system of optimization
problems. We aim to first show how existing methods and concepts in deep learning fall under the NL paradigm and then
we present new formulations that go beyond traditional methods and/or provide insights on how to improve existing
algorithms and designs.
3.1 Associative Memory
Associative memory—the ability to form and retrieve connections between events—is a fundamental mental process and
is an inseparable component of human learning (Terry 2017). Often in the literature, the concept of memorization and
learning are used interchangeably; in neuropsychology literature, however, these two are clearly distinguished. More
specifically, following neuropsychology literature (Okano et al. 2000), we build our terminology based on the following
definition of memory and learning:
Learning vs. Memorization:
Memory is a neural update caused by an input, and learning is the process for acquiring effective and useful memory.
In this work, our goal is to first show that all the elements of a computational sequence model, including optimizers and
neural networks, areassociative memory systemsthat compress their owncontext flow. Broadly speaking, associative
memory is an operator that maps a set of keys to a set of values. We follow the general definition of associative memory by
Behrouz et al. (2025b):
Definition 1(Associative Memory).Given a set of keys K⊆R 𝑑𝑘 and valuesV⊆R 𝑑𝑣 , associative memory is an operator
M(·) that maps the set of keys K to valuesV. To learn such mapping from the data, an objective ˜L(· ;·) measures the quality
of the mapping andMcan be computed by:
M∗ =arg min
M
˜L(M(K);V).(6)
7
=== PAGE 8 ===
While the operator itself is a memory and the mapping acts as a memorization process (i.e., memorizing the connections of
events in the context), acquiring such effective operator based on the data, is a learning process. Notice that, here, keys and
values can be any arbitrary event that memory aims to map them and are not limited to tokens. Later, we will discuss
that given a context flow, keys and values might be tokens, gradients, sub-sequences, etc. Furthermore, while the term of
associative memory is more common in neuroscience and neuropsychology literature, the above formulation is also closely
related to data compression and low-dimensional representation. That is, one can interpret the optimization process in
Equation 6 as the training process of a networkM(.) that aims to compress the mappings into its parameters, representing
them in a lower dimensional space.
In sequence modeling, where keys and values are input tokens (e.g., tokenized text), the choice of objective and the optimiza-
tion process for solving Equation 6 can result in distinct sequence modeling architectures (see Liu et al. 2024b and Behrouz
et al. 2025b) such as global/local softmax attention (Vaswani et al. 2017), or other modern recurrent models (Katharopoulos
et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2023; Behrouz et al. 2025c). This simple formulation of sequence models provides us with better
understanding of their internal process and also a tool to simply compare their modeling power based on their objective
and optimization process. In the following, using step-by-step examples, we discuss how this formulation can be applied to
all components of a neural architecture (including its optimization process in pre-training) and in fact, how a model is an
integrated system of multi-level, nested, potentially parallel memories, each of which with its own context flow.
A Simple Example of MLP Training.We start with a simple example, in which we aim to train a 1-layer MLP
(parameterized with𝑊 ) for taskT and on datasetDtrain ={𝑥 1,...,𝒙 |D train|} by optimizing the objective L(· ;·) with
gradient descent. In this case, the training process objective is to solve the following optimization problem:
𝑊∗ =arg min
𝑊
L(𝑊;D train),(7)
whose optimization by (stochastic/online) gradient descent results in a weight update rule:
𝑊𝑡+1 =𝑊𝑡−𝜂𝑡+1∇𝑊L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1)|              {z              }
Surprise
=𝑊𝑡−𝜂𝑡+1∇𝑦𝑡+1L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1)
|                {z                }
Surprise in the Output
⊗𝒙 𝑡+1,where𝒙 𝑡+1 ∼D train,(8)
where𝑦𝑡+1 =𝑊𝑥 𝑡+1 is the output of the model for input𝑥𝑡+1 and we used the simplifying notation:∇𝑦𝑡+1L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1) :=
𝜕L
𝜕𝑦|𝑦=𝑊𝑥𝑡+1 . In this case,∇𝑊L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1) is the surprise metric that shows how much the current input is different from
previously observed data. Similarly, ∇𝑦𝑡+1L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1) is the surprised metric for the output (or more accuratelylocal
surprise signal in representation spacethat quantifies the mismatch between the current output and the structure the
objectiveL(· ;·) enforces)–measuring how much surprising the model’s prediction is for this input. Given this formulation,
one can let the surprise value of output be𝑢𝑡+1 =∇ 𝑦𝑡+1L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1) and reformulate the backpropagation process as the
solution to an optimization problem on finding an associative memory that maps input data pointsDtrain ={𝑥 𝑡}|D train|
𝑡=1 to
their corresponding𝑢𝑡+1 =∇ 𝑦𝑡+1L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1). That is, we letM(·)=𝑊 𝑡· parametrizes the memory, and use dot-product
similarity to measure the quality of𝑊𝑡’s mapping between𝑥 𝑡+1 and∇ 𝑦𝑡+1L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1):
𝑊𝑡+1 =arg min
𝑊
⟨𝑊𝒙𝑡+1,𝑢𝑡+1⟩+ 1
2𝜂𝑡+1
∥𝑊−𝑊 𝑡∥2
2 =arg min
𝑊
⟨𝑊𝒙𝑡,∇𝑦𝑡+1L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1)⟩+ 1
2𝜂𝑡+1
∥𝑊−𝑊 𝑡∥2
2.(9)
Therefore, this formulation translates the training phase of the model as a process of acquiring effective memory that maps
data samples to their Local Surprise Signal (LSS) in representation space–measuring how surprising its corresponding
output is. This gradient can be viewed as an error in the prediction (with gradient being zero when the loss is minimized).
Later in Section 4, we discuss the backpropagation process as an associative memory in more details, but as a preliminary
takeaway from this simple example:
Training a Linear Layer with Backpropagation as a Surprise-based Memory:
A linear layer trained with backpropagation learns from data by memorizing how surprising their predicted outputs
are; i.e., backpropagation can be viewed as an associative memory that maps each data sample to the error of its
corresponding prediction.
Accordingly, in this example, our model hasa single gradient flowover the data samples, which is only active over dataset
Dtrain ={𝑥 1,...,𝒙 |D train|}andwill be frozen for any other data samples afterwards (i.e., inference or test time).
8
=== PAGE 9 ===
In the above example, we can replace the gradient descent algorithm with its momentum-based variant, resulting in the
update rule of:
𝑊𝑡+1 =𝑊𝑡−𝒎𝑡+1,(10)
𝒎𝑡+1 =𝒎𝑡+𝜂𝑡+1∇𝑊L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1)=𝒎 𝑡+𝜂𝑡+1∇𝑦𝑡+1L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1)⊗𝒙 𝑡+1.(11)
In Equation 11, given the previous state of Equation 10 (at time𝑡), the value of∇𝑊L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1) or similarly∇𝑦𝑡+1L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1)
does not depend on the output of recurrence in Equation 11 and so can be pre-computed beforehand: Leting 𝑢𝑡+1 =
∇𝑊L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1), Equation 11 can be reformulated as:
𝑊𝑡+1 =𝑊𝑡−𝒎𝑡+1, (12)
𝒎𝑡+1 =arg min
𝒎
−⟨𝒎,∇𝑊𝑡L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1)⟩+ 1
2𝜂𝑡+1
∥𝒎−𝒎 𝑡∥2
2 =arg min
𝒎
−⟨𝒎𝒙 𝑡+1,∇𝑦𝑡+1L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1)⟩+ 1
2𝜂𝑡+1
∥𝒎−𝒎 𝑡∥2
2.
(13)
Given this formulation, one can interpret the momentum term as either: (1) a value-less associative memory that compress
the gradients into its parameters, or (2) an associative memory that learns how to map data points to their corresponding
LSS-value. Interestingly, this formulation reveals that gradient descent with momentum can be viewed as a two-level
optimization procedure, where the memory is optimized by simple gradient descent algorithm1.
Concluding the above examples, we observed that the training process of a 1-layer MLP with: (1) Gradient descent is a
1-levelassociative memory that learns how to map data points to their corresponding LSS-value; and (2) Gradient descent
with momentum is a2-levelassociative memory (or optimization process) that the inner-level learns to store gradient
values into its parameters, and then the outer-level updates the slow weight (i.e.,𝑊𝑡) with the value of the inner-level
memory. While these are the most simple examples with respect to both architecture and optimizer algorithms, one might
ask if similar conclusion can be made in more complex setups.
An Example of Architectural Decomposition.In the next example, we replace the MLP module in our previous example
with a linear attention (Katharopoulos et al. 2020). That is, we aim to train a 1-layer linear attention for taskT and on a
sequence ofDtrain ={𝑥 1,...,𝒙 |D train|} by optimizing the objectiveL with gradient descent. Recalling the unnormalized
linear attention formulation:
𝒌𝑡 =𝑊 𝒌𝒙𝑡,𝒗 𝑡 =𝑊 𝒗𝒙𝑡,𝒒 𝑡 =𝑊 𝒒𝒙𝑡,(14)
M𝑡 =M𝑡−1+𝒗𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡 ,(15)
𝑦𝑡 =M𝑡𝒒𝑡 .(16)
As discussed in earlier studies (Liu et al. 2024b; Behrouz et al. 2025b), the recurrence in Equation 15 can be reformulated as
the optimization process of a matrix-valued associative memoryM𝑡(·) to compress the mappings of keys and values into its
parameters. Specifically, in Definition 1, if we let ˜L(M𝑡−1 ;𝒌𝑡,𝒗𝑡) :=−⟨M 𝑡−1𝒌𝑡,𝒗𝑡⟩ and aim to optimize the memory with
gradient descent, the memory update rule is: (Note that∇ ˜L(M𝑡−1 ;𝒌𝑡,𝒗𝑡)=−𝒗 𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡 and we let learning rate𝜂𝑡 = 1)
M𝑡+1 =arg min
M
−⟨M𝒌𝑡+1,𝒗𝑡+1⟩+ 1
2∥M−M 𝑡∥2
2 (17)
⇒M 𝑡+1 =M𝑡−∇ ˜L(M𝑡 ;𝒌𝑡+1,𝒗𝑡+1)=M 𝑡+𝒗𝑡+1𝒌⊤
𝑡+1,(18)
which is equivalent to the update rule of an unnormalized linear attention in Equation 15. Also, as we observed in the first
example, training a linear layer with gradient descent can be viewed as a 1-level optimization of an associative memory
(Equation 8) and so the general training/updating process of projection layers (i.e.,𝑊𝒌,𝑊 𝒗, and𝑊𝒒) is itself an optimization
process of associative memory. Therefore, training a linear attention with gradient descent can be seen as a two-level
optimization process, where the outer-loop (also known as training process) optimizes the projection layers with gradient
descent, while the inner-loop optimizes the inner memory ofM 𝑡 with gradient descent.
In the examples we discussed so far, we have two associative memories, each of which has their own optimization process
and gradient flow. That is, in the optimization of the outer-level parameters of 𝑊𝒌,𝑊 𝒗, and𝑊𝒒 there is no gradient
1We use the term two- or multi-level to describe the optimizationprocedure. This differs from classical multi-level optimization, where the optimization
problemsare arranged hierarchically.
9
=== PAGE 10 ===
Figure 3: An example of comparing a FFN (e.g., MLP) with linear attention in a Transformer-based backbone, optimizing
with gradient descent. The red components are blocks in the first level (with frequency 1), while blue components are blocks
in the second level (frequency𝐿). Linear attention with learnable initial memory state (referred to as Linear Attention++)
is the same as an MLP layer but with in-context learning ability and adaptation to the input sequence.
with respect to parameterM(·) and so there is no backpropagation through it. Similarly, in the inner-level, there is
no backpropagation through projection layers and they are considered frozen. Furthermore, it is notable that in this
example, the above formulation is also closely connected to FWPs perspective of linear attentions (Schlag et al. 2021),
where projections are considered slow weights, and memory update in Equation 15 is the fast weight update rule.
Architectural Decomposition with More Levels.In both examples above, we discussed how they can be viewed as a
2-level optimization process (coinciding with their FWPs interpretations). In practice, however, we may need to use more
powerful optimization process, and/or more powerful recurrent update rules for memory. As a simple example, assume we
use gradient descent with momentum to train a linear attention model. As we saw above, the linear attention component
can be decomposed into two nested optimization processes. Similarly, the model here can be represented as a 2-level
optimization problem, where (1) the inner level optimizes the memory to compress the context using gradient descent
(Equation 17), and (2) the outer level optimizes the projection layers with gradient descent with momentum. Interestingly,
we saw that “gradient descent with momentum” algorithm itself can be viewed as a 2-level optimization process where the
momentum term itself is an associative memory that compress the past gradients into its parameters.
3.2 Nested Optimization Processes
In the previous section, we provided examples to demonstrate how one can decompose a machine learning model into a
set of nested or multi-level optimization procedures. Next, we first present a formalization of nested learning problems and
then define Neural Learning Module–an integrated computational system that learns from data.
In previous sections, we decomposed the model into a set of optimization process. However, it is still unclear if we can
define a hierarchy (or order) over these processes, and uniquely represent the model in this format. Inspired by the
hierarchy of brain waves that indicates the information processing frequency rate of each part (discussed in Section 1), we
use the update rate of each optimization process to order the components in multiple levels. To this end, we let the one
update step over one data point to be the unit of time, and define the update frequency rate of each component as:
Definition 2(Update Frequency).For any component of 𝐴, which can be a parametric component (e.g., learnable weights or
momentum term in gradient descent with momentum) or a non-parametric component (e.g., attention block), we define its
frequency, denoted by𝑓 𝐴, as its number of updates per unit of time.
Given the above update frequency, we can order the components of a machine learning algorithm based on operator(·≻·) .
We say𝐴 is faster than𝐵 and denote𝐴≻𝐵 if:(1) 𝑓𝐴 >𝑓 𝐵, or(2) 𝑓𝐴 =𝑓 𝐵 but the computation of the𝐵’s state at time𝑡
requires the computation of𝐴’s state at time𝑡. In this definition, when𝐴⊁𝐵 and𝐵⊁𝐴 , we let𝐴
𝑓
=𝐵 , which indicates
that𝐴 and𝐵 has the same frequency update, but their computation is independent of each other (Later, we provide an
10
=== PAGE 11 ===
example of this cases in AdamW optimizer). Based on the above operator, we sort the components into an ordered set of
“levels”, where (1) components in the same level have the same frequency update, and (2) the higher the level is, the lower its
frequency. Given the above formulations of levels and update frequency, we next formally define nested learning:
Definition 3(Nested System).A (ordered) nested system is a system with 𝐾 (ordered) levels such that each level 𝑘,1 ≤𝑘≤𝐾 ,
consists of a set of optimization problems{(L(𝑘)
𝑖 ,C(𝑘)
𝑖 ,𝚯(𝑘)
𝑖 )}𝑁𝑘
𝑖=1, whereL𝑖(·;·) is the optimization objective in the𝑖-th problem,
C𝑖 is its context (the data that is optimized on), 𝚯𝑖 is the feasible set of its parameters, and each parameter is optimized using
gradient descent:
𝜽𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡+1 =arg min
𝚽(𝑘)
𝑖
⟨𝚽(𝑘)
𝑖 𝒙𝑡+1,−∇L(𝑘)
𝑖 (𝜽(𝑘)
𝑖𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1)⟩+ 1
2𝜂𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡+1
∥𝚽(𝑘)
𝑖 −𝜽𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡 ∥2
2 where𝒙 𝑡+1 ∼C (𝑘)
𝑖 ,and𝚽 𝑖(𝑘)∈𝚯(𝑘)
𝑖 .(19)
Notice that each optimization process has its own gradient flow, and therefore sometimes we refer to them as a box of
gradient flow corresponding to an optimization problem. Through this paper, we further generalize our definition of nested
systems, and allow finding non-parametric solutions for some boxes (i.e., optimization problems).
The above definition provides a general flexible definition for a nested system that does not specify if there is any dependence
among different boxes (i.e., a box can determines the context or the parameter space of another box). In the next sections,
we discuss how knowledge/information can be transferred between different levels or boxes. Throughout this paper, we
focus on the Nested Systems of Associative Memories (NSAM) that is a nested system, in which each optimization process is
an associative-memory. More formally,
Definition 4(Nested System of Associative Memories).A nested system of associative memory ( NSAM) is a system with 𝐾
(ordered) levels such that each level 𝑘,1 ≤𝑘≤𝐾 , consists of a set of optimization problems {(L(𝑘)
𝑖 ,C(𝑘)
𝑖 ,𝚯(𝑘)
𝑖 )}𝑁𝑘
𝑖=1, where
C𝑖 ={(𝒌 (𝑖)
𝑗 ,𝒗(𝑖)
𝑗 )}𝐿𝑖
𝑗=1 is a set of key-value pairs, L𝑖(·;·,·) measures the quality of memory learned mappings in the 𝑖-th
problem,𝚯𝑖 is the set of feasible memory parameters with each parameter optimized using gradient descent:
𝜽𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡+1 =arg min
𝚽(𝑘)
𝑖
⟨𝚽(𝒌)
𝒊 𝒌(𝑖)
𝑡+1,−∇L(𝑘)
𝑖 (𝜽(𝑘)
𝑖𝑡 ;𝒌(𝑖)
𝑡+1,𝒗(𝑖)
𝑡+1)⟩+ 1
2𝜂𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡+1
∥𝚽(𝑘)
𝑖 −𝜽𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡 ∥2
2,(20)
where(𝒌 (𝑖)
𝑡+1,𝒗(𝑖)
𝑡+1)∼C (𝑘)
𝑖 and𝚽𝑖(𝑘)∈𝚯(𝑘)
𝑖 .
Given a query𝒒, for each associative memoryM(𝑘)
𝑖 , we useM(𝑘)
𝑖 (𝒒) to refer to the forward pass process (i.e., retrieval
process) of the memory. While our formulation ofNSAMcan simply be defined by any optimization process beyond gradient
descent, and initially, it may seem that the strict condition ofoptimization by gradient descentcan limit the modeling
power of the definition, through this paper, we show that modern architectures alongside certain well-known optimization
algorithms can be viewed as instances of NSAM. We then build on top of this intuition and discuss how to go further with
stacking multiple levels and design models with enhanced continual learning capabilities.
The new dimension of stacking multiple levels is an important characteristic of nested learning, where the depth of
computation can be enhanced with increasing the number of levels. Depending on the design, context, and the type of
knowledge transfer, this depth of computation can itself be viewed as different concepts such as: higher-order in-context
learning ability, latent computation (e.g., Loop Transformers), multiple memory systems, and more expressive optimizers.
Later, we discuss all such implications, but next, we use a simple example that connects MLP layers in Transformer
architectures with linear or deep memory blocks.
Example of an MLP Layer vs. Linear Attention.Let us compare two models: (1) a Transformer architecture, and (2)
the same backbone but with replacing the MLP block with a linear attention mechanism (sharing the keys and values
from previous layer), in which the initial state of its memory is meta-learned (similar to Behrouz et al. (2025c) or Sun
et al. (2024)). We refer to the second variant as Adaptive Transformer or AdaTransformer. Both models are optimized on
Next Token Prediction (NTP) objective with gradient descent. As discussed in the initial examples, and also illustrated in
Figure 3, both models have two levels, and for the sake of clarity, we use red (resp. blue) to highlight computations/weight
in the first level (resp. second level). More formally, let 𝑋={𝑥 𝑖}𝑇
𝑖=1 be an input sequence of tokens, the output of both
blocks are computed as (For the sake of simplicity, we assumeMLP(·)=·𝑊 MLP , and remove normalizations):
11
=== PAGE 12 ===
𝒌𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒌,𝒗 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒗,𝒒 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒒,
𝒚attn =Attn(𝒌,𝒗,𝒒),
𝒚block =MLP(𝒚attn) =𝒚 attn𝑊MLP,(Transformer Block)
𝒌𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒌,𝒗 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒗,𝒒 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒒,
𝒚attn =Attn(𝒌,𝒗,𝒒),
𝒚block =𝒚 attn𝑊LinAttn.(AdaTransformer Block)
The formulation of both blocks seem to be very similar and the only difference comes from the level of𝑊MLP and𝑊LinAttn
weights. That is, while𝑊MLP is in the first level and so is persistent with respect to the context,𝑊LinAttn is adaptive and is
updated in-context by (M(·)is parametrized by𝑊 LinAttn):
M𝑡 =M𝑡−1+𝒗𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡 .(21)
In earlier variants of linear attention, the initial state of M(·) or equivalently 𝑊LinAttn is considered as zero matrix,
M0 = 0. Similar to more advanced design choices (Sun et al. 2024; Behrouz et al. 2025c), however, this initial state can
be meta-learned to adapt fast to a context. In this setting, the initial state of M0 =𝑊LinAttninit is optimized in the first
level with NTP objective, while given the context,𝑊LinAttn is optimized in the second level as an associative memory with
dot-product objective (Behrouz et al. 2025b).
The above example is also valid when using more advanced and deep MLP blocks in Transformer architecture (such as
SwiGLU (Shazeer 2020)) and compared it with its recurrent memory counterpart (Behrouz et al. 2025a). Furthermore, this
simple example implies that the current perspective on hybrid architectures as the combination of expressive softmax
attention and efficient recurrent models is somewhat misleading and it follows the conventional Transformer backbone
design but with additional in-context learning capabilities for MLP blocks. We discuss this further in Section 6 and Section 7.
As a takeaway of the discussion in this subsection about the concept of nested systems and nested learning:
Stacking Levels in Nested Learning:
Nested learningallows computational models that are composed of multiple (multi-layer) levels to learn from and
process data with different levels of abstraction and frequencies of update.
As discussed earlier, it is common in the literature to separate architectures from their optimization processes and to treat
them as independent design choices, with the aim of combining algorithms that achieve the greatest expressive power
in each aspect. In practice, however, a Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) that is optimized with stochastic
gradient descent can learn a very different solution than the same architecture when Adam optimizer is used (Kingma et al.
2014a). Accordingly, when interacting with such machine learning algorithms, we observe that despite the similarity in
the architecture axes, the overall trained models show different predictions or generates different outputs. From the NL’s
viewpoint, however, a machine learning algorithm is represented as an interconnected system of optimization problems
and model’s actions, predictions, and generation of output depends on this system as a whole, not necessarily each of its
sub-components. To this end, we define the term of neural learning module to refer to this representation of a model, where
architecture and optimization process jointly determine the model and its outputs. While such joint representation might
not seem significant in the current machine learning pipelines, where there is a training and then test phases, it becomes
more important in the continual setup we advocate for, where there is no training/test phases (see more discussions in
Section 8).
Neural Learning Modules are Inter-connected Systems.Based on the definition of neural learning module, one
important question is how the architecture and optimization process are interconnected systems and how they can affect
each other. Recall the general formulation for training a neural network: Given a taskT , its corresponding data distribution
𝑝(T), a model𝑓(·;·)parameterized byΦ T, and an objectiveL(·;·)we aim to learn parametersΦ ∗
T such that:
Φ∗
T =arg min
Φ
E 𝒙,𝒚∼𝑝(T) [L(Φ;𝒙,𝒚)].(22)
In practice, we optimize the above problem based on a given datasetDtrain and an optimization algorithm such as stochastic
gradient descent:
Φ𝑡+1 =Φ𝑡−𝜂𝑡+1∇Φ𝑡L(Φ𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1,𝒚𝑡+1),where(𝒙 𝑡+1,𝒚𝑡+1)∼D train.(23)
12
=== PAGE 13 ===
One interpretation for the optimization process of model 𝑓(· ;·) in Equation 23 is to see the model as the data generator for
the optimization process in Equation 23. That is, as discussed in the first example in Section 3.1, and later we will show in
Section 4, the optimization process is an associative memory that aims to compress the patterns between the training data
and its gradients (or surprise) and so the dataset for internally training such memory (i.e., the gradients of the model) is
generated by the model. Therefore, the type of the model can result in generating dataset (i.e., gradients) with different
patterns and distributions over time. The effect of the optimization process and this data generation also fed back at the
model itself, where the next state of the parameters in the model are determined by the optimization algorithms. As we will
discuss in Section 4, looking at optimizers as associative memories on the gradients of the model implies that each optimizer
has some special traits such as better memory management, higher compression, etc. Therefore, the choice of such
algorithms requires understanding the generated gradients and also changes of the model in the parameter space.
3.3 Knowledge Transfer Between Levels
So far, we mainly focused on the concept of nested learning and how optimization problems are located in different levels.
It is, however, still unclear that how nested optimization problems (in different levels) can affect each other, or in general
how they can contribute to the output of the system, and so be interconnected. In this section, we discuss several potential
knowledge transfer methods between components in different levels. For the sake of clarity, we discuss the knowledge
transfer between two levels and blocks, i.e.,B(0) =(L (0),C(0),𝚯(0)) andB(1) =(L (1),C(1),𝚯(1)) with corresponding
memoriesM(0)(·)andM (1)(·), respectively:
Direct Connection of Levels (Parametric).The first type of knowledge transfer is to directly incorporate the weights in
different levels or blocks. To this end, the forward pass or the retrieval process from the lower-frequency (i.e., higher-level)
memory system is also conditioned on the parameters of the higher-frequency (i.e., lower-level) memory:
M(0)(·):=M (0)(·;𝚯 (1)).(24)
In a more specific formulation, and as a special variant of the above formulation, we can condition the output ofM(0)(·)
based on the output (or forward pass) of the higher-frequency memory:
M(0)(·):=M (0)(·;M (1)(·)),(25)
where we slightly abused notation by hiding the dependence on the second argument. As an example of this type of
knowledge transfer, in linear Transformer (or FWP) (Katharopoulos et al. 2020; Schlag et al. 2021), where the initial memory
state is zero, the stored knowledge of a lower level (fast weight) directly affect the output of the model in another level.
That is, one can re-write the forward pass (memory retrieval) as:
𝒚𝑡 =M𝑡𝒒𝑡 =
Forward pass of the
higher-frequency memory
z                             }|                             {
M𝑡

𝒙𝑡𝑊𝑞

|  {z  }
Forward pass of the
lower-frequency memory
(26)
Direct Connection of Levels (Non-Parametric).Another form of direct connection between levels is a non-parametric
variant of the above formulation, where the blockB(1) is optimized by finding non-parametric solution. Therefore, the
forward pass of the low-frequency memory is conditioned on the context and output of higher-frequency memory:
M(0)(·):=M (0)(·;C (1)),or similarly,M (0)(·):=M (0)(·;M (1)(·;C(1))).(27)
As an example of this variant, one can refer to Transformers and softmax attention module (Vaswani et al. 2017). There is an
important characteristic for both above variants: there is no backpropagation through any state of the blocks in two different
levels and knowledge transfers through direct conditioning the output of one level on the other’s output/parameters.
Therefore, in this process the state of each block is treated as hyperparameter for the other.
Knowledge Transfer via Backpropagation.Another form of knowledge transfer is through backpropagation, where
there is a gradient flow between blocks in different levels. The forward pass of this design is the same as the forward
13
=== PAGE 14 ===
pass discussed above. The backward pass, however, is the main difference, where in the above two cases the state of each
associative memory is considered as hyperparameters of the other but here both states are optimized in the same gradient
flow. Therefore, for a simple case of two blocks in two levels, we have:
M(0)(·):=M (0)(·;M (1)(·))(Forward Pass)
(
𝚯(1)
𝑡+1 =𝚯(1)
𝑡 −𝜂(1)
𝑡+1𝜹1 ˆ𝒙⊤
𝑡+1,
𝚯(0)
𝑡+1 =𝚯(0)
𝑡 −𝜂(0)
𝑡+1𝜹0𝒙⊤
𝑡+1, (Backward Pass)
where𝜹(0)
𝑡+1 =𝑱 𝜙(0)(𝒙𝑡+1)⊤

𝚯(1)
𝑡+1𝜹(1)
𝑡+1

, ˆ𝒙𝑡+1 =𝜙(0)(M(0)(𝒙𝑡)),𝜙(0)(·) is non-linearity, and𝑱𝜙(0)(·) is the Jacobian. In this
design, two blocks are in the same flow of gradient, but are updated based on different frequencies. We provide an example
this design in Section 7, when we discuss continuum memory systems.
Knowledge Transfer via Initialization.Model Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) (Finn et al. 2017), is one of the most
popular form of meta-learning (or learning to learn) that aims to learn a global initial point for a model so it could learn fast
a new task. From the nested learning perspective, there are two nested optimization processes, in which the inner problem
iterates over its own context and based on its internal objective, the higher-level problem measures its own learned weight
as the initial point of the inner problem. More formally, we have
𝚯(1)
0 =arg min
Φ
EC∼C(0)
"
ℓ(M(1)(·;Φ),C)
#
,(28)
where the higher level block learns the best initial value over all possible contexts the lower level problem might have. As
discussed earlier, any MAML-based learning model is an instance of this case, but as a more specific example, we refer to
the example of (MLP Layer vs. Linear Attention), which is discussed in Section 3.2 and Figure 3.
Connections with Generation.One of the most common form of knowledge transfer is through generating weights or
context. That is, one lower-frequency (resp. higher-frequency) block generates the weight of a higher-frequency (resp.
lower-frequency) block. More formally,
 

𝚯(1) =𝒈

M(0) ;L(0),C(0),𝚯(0)

,or
𝚯(0) =𝒈

M(1) ;L(1),C(1),𝚯(1)

,
(Weight Generation)
 

C(1) =𝒈

M(0) ;L(0),C(0),𝚯(0)

,or
C(0) =𝒈

M(1) ;L(1),C(1),𝚯(1)

.
(Context Generation)
There are two important examples of the above form for knowledge transfer: (1) Hypernetworks: where the weights of a
targeted neural network is generated by another (generator) network. (2) Optimization process: where the architecture
generates the input for the optimizer. That is, the context (or input data) of an optimizer is the gradients that are generated
by the architecture. For more discussion on this topic, see Section 4. Note that this example is not necessarily about
“learned optimizers” and it is valid for the commonly used optimization process and algorithms such as gradient descent,
Adam (Kingma et al. 2014a), AdaGrad (Duchi et al. 2011), etc.
A Note on Designing Neural Learning Modules.In the above, we discussed only some examples of possible knowledge
transfer methods and also the potential connections of different levels. The formulation of NL and neural learning module,
however, is general and so is not limited to the above specific set of methods. Accordingly, to design a neural learning
module from a nested learning perspective, there are two important steps and design choices:
Designing Neural Learning Modules:
There are two high-level design choices in developing a neural learning module: (1) The design of optimization problems
and their frequency (i.e., designing components inNSAM); (2) The design of knowledge transfer between levels.
It is notable that with different choices of knowledge transfer, some learning paradigms can be seen as a part of a neural
learning model: E.g., (1) Meta learning, when two blocks in two levels transfer their knowledge with one level meta-learns
the other; more specifically, (2) Model Agnostic Meta Learning (MAML) (Finn et al. 2017), when knowledge transfer is
though learning the initialization; (3) Hypernetworks, when one higher-frequency block generates the weights for the
14
=== PAGE 15 ===
other lower-frequency block; (4) Learned optimizers, when the knowledge transfer is through data generation (i.e., one
high-frequency block generates the gradient for the other lower-frequency block).
4 Optimizers as Learning Modules
In this section, we start with viewing backpropagation process and optimizing a neural network from the associative
memory and data compression perspective. Then, we discuss how variants such as momentum-based optimizers are
instances of nested associative memory systems. Finally, we discuss alternative methods leading to deep optimizers with
higher expressive power from the associative memory perspective.
4.1 Backpropagation as an Associative Memory
Updating the weights of a neural network through backpropagation (Linnainmaa 1970; Rumelhart et al. 1986) has been the
critical component of training large-scale deep neural networks. Intuitively, in this optimization process, first, the error of
the model’s output with respect to target is calculated, and then each layer is updated based on its contribution to this error.
This section aims to explain this process through the lens of associative memory and discuss how it fits within the nested
learning paradigm. For the sake of clarity and simplicity, we assume a deep MLP model, but all the derived formulations
in the following can simply be adapted to other architectures as well. Given an MLP with 𝐿 layers parameterized with
{𝑊ℓ·+𝒃 ℓ}𝐿
ℓ=1, the required gradients in backpropagation are computed as:
𝜕L
𝜕𝑊ℓ
=𝜹 ℓ ˆ𝒙⊤
ℓ−1,and𝜹 ℓ =𝑱 𝜙ℓ(𝒛ℓ)⊤  𝑊⊤
ℓ+1𝜹ℓ+1

|                    {z                    }
local output surprise for layerℓ
,(29)
where𝒛ℓ =𝑊ℓ ˆ𝒙ℓ−1+𝒃ℓ is pre-activation, and so ˆ𝒙ℓ =𝜙ℓ(𝒛ℓ) is the output ofℓ-th layer,𝜙ℓ(·) is its non-linearity, and𝑱𝜙ℓ(·)
is the Jacobian. Therefore, the update of theℓ-th layer with gradient descent is computed as:
𝑊ℓ𝑡+1 =𝑊ℓ𝑡−𝜂ℓ𝑡+1 𝜹ℓ ˆ𝒙⊤
ℓ−1 .(30)
Here, ˆ𝒙ℓ−1 is the input of the layer and𝜹ℓ measures the local error signal for layerℓ or equivalently is a metric that measures
the surprise of layerℓ’s output given its input. Similar to our example in Section 3.1, we can write Equation 30 as:
𝑊ℓ𝑡+1 =arg min
𝑊
⟨𝑊 ˆ𝒙ℓ−1,𝜹ℓ⟩+ 1
2𝜂ℓ𝑡+1
∥𝑊−𝑊 ℓ𝑡∥2
𝐹,(31)
which is an associative memory module that aim to map the input of each layer ˆ𝒙ℓ−1 to its local error signal, 𝜹ℓ (see
Definition 1). That is, the above formulation implies thatthe training process of a neural network with gradient descent and
backpropagation can be viewed as a compression process, in which each layer stores the mappings between its input and
the corresponding local error signal. Later in §4.5, we discuss how this viewpoint helps with designing more expressive
learning rules for backpropagation.
Training a Deep Neural Network with Backpropagation as a Surprise-based Memory:
A neural network trained with backpropagation learns from data by memorizing how surprising their predicted outputs
are; i.e., backpropagation is an associative memory that maps each data point to the error in its corresponding prediction.
Backpropagation ≠ Linear Attention.A common misinterpretation for Equation 30 is to assume 𝜹ℓ is a pre-computed
term and so backpropagation (at least on a linear layer) recovers Hebbian-rule, resulting in the equivalency of the
optimization process and performing linear attention on gradients. Our formulation, however, shows that the update rule in
backpropagation is a self-referential process (Schmidhuber 1993), where the values of the associative memory is generated
by itself, making it a more complex associative memory than a simple linear attention on gradients (see Section 4.5).
4.2 Momentum-based Optimizers as Associative Memories
Momentum-based optimizers are the major components of modern machine learning models’ training (Duchi et al. 2011;
Kingma et al. 2014a; Jordan et al. 2024). To explain momentum-based optimizers as associative memories, let us start from
15
=== PAGE 16 ===
a simple gradient descent algorithm:
𝑊𝑡+1 =𝑊𝑡−𝜂𝑡∇𝑊𝑡L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1),(32)
which updates the current state of the weights based on the momentary gradient (surprise). This update rule does not
incorporate the previous tokens and also the loss landscape that have been traversed so far, resulting in slower (or less
robust) convergence in many scenarios. To fix this, momentum-based gradient descent methods incorporate an Exponential
Moving Averages (EMAs) of past gradients:
𝑊ℓ𝑡+1 =𝑊ℓ𝑡+𝒎 ℓ𝑡+1
𝒎ℓ𝑡+1 =𝛼 ℓ,𝑡+1𝒎ℓ𝑡−𝜂ℓ,𝑡+1∇𝑊ℓ𝑡L  𝑊ℓ𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1
 =𝛼 ℓ,𝑡+1𝒎ℓ𝑡−𝜂ℓ,𝑡+1 𝜹ℓ ˆ𝒙⊤
ℓ−1,(33)
where matrix (or vector) 𝒎𝑡 is the momentum at state 𝑡 and𝛼𝑡 and𝜂𝑡 are (adaptive) learning and momentum rates,
respectively, and𝜹ℓ and ˆ𝒙ℓ−1 are defined the same as in Equation 29. Similar to Equation 31 and one of the examples in
Section 3.1, assuming𝛼𝑡+1 = 1, the momentum term can be viewed as the result of optimizing the following objective with
gradient descent:
min
𝒎
⟨𝒎 ˆ𝒙ℓ−1,𝜹ℓ⟩.(34)
The case of𝛼𝑡+1 ≠ 1is equivalent to GD on the above minimization plus an ℓ2-regularization on the momentum term.
Thus, momentum can indeed be viewed as an associative memory module that learns how to compress the past gradients
of the objective into its parameters. Contrary to Equation 31, which was a simple 1-level associative memory and the
update was directly applied to the memory, here the state of the momentum determines the update for the weights. In
other words, it is a 2-level optimization procedure, in which the inner-loop learns the momentum and the outer-loop uses
the state of the momentum to update the weights.
From this perspective, we can generalize the definition of momentum from EMAs to any arbitrary associative memory
module that aims to compress the past gradients or maps the input of each token to its corresponding local error. This
generalized momentum can be expressed as:
𝑊ℓ𝑡+1 =𝑊ℓ𝑡+𝒎 ℓ𝑡+1,(35)
(36)
where𝒎 ℓ is the solution of the following associative memory, optimized by gradient descent:
min
𝒎
˜L(𝒎; ˆ𝒙ℓ−1,−𝜹ℓ).(37)
Here, the objective ˜L(·) is different from the original objective of the problem at hand, and ˜L(·) is the objective that
defines the momentum and measures the quality of its mappings. In fact, the momentum term in this formulation aims to
adapt in-context (recall that the context of the momentum is the gradients) to the local error rates based on the input of the
layer. Most popular optimizers are formulated as element-wise update rule (for computational efficiency reasons) and so in
Appendix B, we first explore the element-wise associative memory formulation of momentum and connect it to popular
optimizers such as Adam (Kingma et al. 2014a). Showing that Adam can be viewed as the optimal associative memory
to the𝐿2-regression objective that aims to predict the variance of gradients, we discuss other similar algorithms such as
RMSProp (Hinton et al. 2012), SignSGD and its momentum-based variants (Bernstein et al. 2018), NAdam (Dozat 2016),
AMSGrad (Reddi et al. 2016), RAdam (Liu et al. 2020), and Lion (Chen et al. 2023) are also instances of an associative memory
that aims to compress the gradients. We then go beyond element-wise formulation and show that AdaGrad (Duchi et al.
2011) is also an associative memory module. Due to the connection of AdaGrad with optimizers such as Shampoo (Gupta
et al. 2018) and Soap (Vyas et al. 2025)–i.e., as the approximation of the preconditioning term–we then conclude that
all these optimizers can be re-formulated as associative memory. Next, we discuss another class of optimizers based on
preconditioning and reformulate them from NL’s perspective in more details:
Preconditioning and Approximation of Hessian.Another class of algorithms is preconditioning algorithms where the
idea is to approximate Hessian inverse to mimic the behavior of Newton’s algorithm. Formally, gradient descent with pre-
conditioning is defined as:
𝑊ℓ𝑡+1 =𝑊ℓ𝑡−𝜂𝑡+1 𝑷−1
𝑡+1𝒈ℓ𝑡+1,(38)
16
=== PAGE 17 ===
wherepreconditioner 𝑷𝑡+1 is often a positive-definite matrix. A critical interpretation of preconditioner is their role in
performing gradient descent in a transformed coordinate system, which can be viewed as a mapping from gradients to that
system of interest. Accordingly, we reformulate and interpret the preconditioner in Equation 38 as an associative memory
that maps the set of gradients (or a function of gradients denoted as𝒈) to the system of our choice, denoted as ˆ𝒈:
𝑊ℓ𝑡+1 =𝑊ℓ𝑡−𝜂𝑡+1 𝑷−1
𝑡+1
 𝒈ℓ𝑡+1
,(39)
where internally (in a nested level),𝑷𝑡+1 learns how to perform this mapping using an objective:
min
𝑷
˜L(𝑷( ˆ𝒈) ;𝒈).(40)
Given this viewpoint, the main question is about finding the best coordinate system that can empower the compression
process. The most simple variant is an identity mapping, where we preserve the metric system and use𝑷 to map𝒈 (i.e.,
gradients in this case) to itself, resulting in preconditioning terms in Adam (Kingma et al. 2014a) and AdaGrad (Duchi et al.
2011), as discussed in Appendix B. These results, along with the representation of Adam and its variants as associative
memories, show that not only momentum-based optimizers are associative memories, but they also can be decomposed
into a set of nested learning problems, each of which optimized with gradient descent. In a more general form, however,
one can use more nested levels and optimize the inner problems in Equation 40 with gradient descent, resulting in:
𝑷𝑡+1 =𝑷𝑡+1−𝜁𝑡+1∇𝑷𝑡
˜L(𝑷𝑡 ;𝒈𝑡+1, ˆ𝒈𝑡+1).(41)
In the NL framework, to design an effective preconditioning, one needs to find the right choice of ˆ𝒈 and ˜L. This viewpoint
can also lead to other classes of algorithms with gradient/momentum orthogonalization: e.g., Muon and its variants (Jordan
et al. 2024; Cesista 2025; Keigwin et al. 2025). Recalling Muon optimizer (Jordan et al. 2024):
𝑊ℓ𝑡+1 =𝑊ℓ𝑡+NewtonSchulz𝑘
 𝒎ℓ𝑡+1

𝒎ℓ𝑡+1 =𝛼 ℓ,𝑡+1𝒎ℓ𝑡−𝜂ℓ,𝑡+1∇𝑊ℓ𝑡L  𝑊ℓ𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1
,(42)
whereNewtonSchulz𝑘(·) performs𝑘 steps of Newton-Schulz orthogonalization process. From the above discussion about
the general formulation of preconditioning, one can see NewtonSchulz𝑘(·) operator as a mapping from gradients of
momentum term to a proper metric system. The choice of proper coordinate system in Muon is to orthogonalize the
gradients and so we aim to find a mapping𝑷(·) by minimizing a loss function min𝑷 ˜L(𝑷 ;𝑶,𝒎) where objective ˜L(· ;·,·)
measures the quality of mapping from𝑶 to either𝒎 or𝒈 by𝑷(·) . A critical challenge in this process is that the parameter
𝑶 itself is not given and so the mapping requires learning both the mapping and the proper orthogonal space. A simple
formulation measuring orthogonalization, can be achieved by defining the objective as:
˜L(𝑷(𝒈);𝒈)=∥𝑷(𝒈) ⊤𝑷(𝒈)−𝑰∥ 2
𝑭,(43)
where𝑷(𝒈) is the orthogonal space that we aim to directly learn from gradients. This objective ensures that the gradients
(or momentum) and their mapping are relatively close while the mapping is to an orthogonal space. Optimizing the above
objective to find𝑶=𝑷(𝒈)with one step of gradient descent results in:
𝑶𝑖+1 =𝑶 𝑖−𝜁𝑖+1∇𝑶𝑖
˜L(𝑶𝑖;𝒈𝑡) =𝑶 𝑖−𝜁𝑖+1
 𝑶𝑖−𝒈𝑡+2𝑶𝑖
 𝑶⊤
𝑖 𝑶𝑖−𝑰 ,(44)
which recovers the 3-degree polynomial (initial value 𝑶0 =𝒈 𝑡). In a summary, the higher-frequency level learns the
orthogonal mapping and then the lower-frequency process use the learned mapping to optimize the weights. Later, in
Section 4.4, we discuss a more general viewpoint that considersNewtonSchulz𝑘(·) as a polynomial mapping to enhance
the capacity of the memory.
4.3 Long Context in Optimizers: An Example of Continual Learning with Orthogonal Tasks
When removing the boundary between train and test time, and moving towards models that can continually learn for a
long period of time, the role of (online) optimizers becomes more prominent: mainly due to the need for finding effective
“solutions" rather than converging faster. Finding an effective solution, however, requires global understanding of the
objective to avoid “local minima" as well as moving toward directions that might cause (catastrophic) forgetting of long
past learned tasks. From associative memory perspective and as discussed earlier, the momentum term is expected to be a
17
=== PAGE 18 ===
memory of past gradients, helping the optimization process to have a more global view of the loss landscape. The current
design of momentum, however, acts as a simple low-pass filter that smoothifies the gradient updates and thus has limited
capacity with only incorporating information from recent past.
To better illustrate this limitation, let 𝛽> 0be the momentum’s decay term, and so the contribution of 𝑖-th gradient
before to the current state of the momentum can be calculated as𝛽𝑖(1−𝛽 ). Considering the cumulative sum of gradients’
contributions to the current state of the momentum term (i.e.,𝑺𝑡 = ˝𝑡
𝑖=0𝛽𝑖(1−𝛽) ) and the commonly used value of𝛽= 0.9
in optimization setups, the last 6 gradients (resp. 43 gradients) are responsible for at least 50% (resp. 99%) of the cumulative
contribution, i.e.,𝑺𝑡. This indicates that gradients and generally the global information beyond only past 43 steps contribute
less than 1%, limiting the understanding of the objective landscape and the ability to find effective solutions. This simple
example shows that the current design is limited even in incorporating the long past information, let alone its ability to
properly retrieve information needed for the current state of the momentum.
Coming back to the setup of continual learning and considering one of its simple variants with orthogonal tasks. We let
{(T𝑖,D𝑖,L𝑖)}𝑛
𝑖=1 be the set of tasks, their corresponding data, and their objectives such that for taskT𝑖:
L𝑖(𝑊)=E (𝒙,𝒚)∼D 𝑖

(𝑊⊤𝒙−𝒚) 2
,(45)
and gradients live in orthogonal directions of {𝒖𝑖}𝑛
𝑖=1. Given the task T𝑡 (for large enough 𝑡> 1), when optimizing
the problem with gradient descent with momentum, and after many steps on task 𝑡, the gradients now point along𝒖𝑡.
Accordingly, the momentum term is gradually shifted and now is approximately in𝒖𝑡 direction. This can lead to gradual
forgetting about past gradients, which in turn may cause catastrophic forgetting in the model. That is, the optimization
process can move the weights in a direction that damages the performance on previous tasks, mainly because the optimizer
has no memory of the old gradient subspace that it should avoid. This failure is not about the capacity of the model but the
memory management of the optimization process, failing at finding an effective solution.
Long Context Understanding in Optimizers
Moving from static models to neural learning modules that can continually learn from data/experience, the optimization
process itself can benefit from long-term compression/understanding of gradient subspace to find effective solutions
over diverse sets of tasks and for a long period of time..
Motivated by this observation, we next discuss more expressive variants of momentum that are capable of better memory
management and higher memory capacity:
4.4 More Expressive Designs for Momentum as an Associative Memory
So far we discussed that (1) momentum term can be viewed as an associative memory that aims to compress the (past)
gradients into its parameters; and (2) for developing models that can continually learn for a long period of time and on
diverse sets of tasks, the optimization process need proper information about long past and the global properties of loss
landscape. Next, we discuss how Nested Learning and associative memory viewpoint could result in designing optimizers
with diverse memory management/structure:
Extension: More Expressive Association.As discussed earlier, vanilla momentum term can be viewed as a value-less
associative memory. To allow more expressive associative memory and following the original definition of associative
memory (i.e., mapping keys to values), we let value parameter𝒗𝑖 =𝑷𝑖 and so the momentum aims to minimize:
min
𝒎
⟨𝒎∇L(𝑊 𝑖 ;𝒙𝑖)⊤,𝑷𝑖⟩,(46)
or equivalently, minimizes⟨𝒎,𝑷𝑖∇L(𝑊𝑖 ;𝒙𝑖)⟩. Using gradient descent for updating the momentum results in the update
rule of:
𝑊𝑖+1 =𝑊𝑖+m𝑖+1
m𝑖+1 =m𝑖−𝜂𝑖𝑷𝑖∇L(𝑊𝑖 ;𝒙𝑖),(47)
where we also included a forget gate𝛼𝑖+1 for fogetting the past. This update rule can be viewed as preconditioning the
momentum GD. Here, the momentum term with preconditioning is interpreted as an associative memory that learns
18
=== PAGE 19 ===
how to compress the mappings between𝑷𝑖 and the gradient term∇L(𝑊𝑖 ;𝒙𝑖). While any reasonable choice (e.g., random
features) of preconditioning may also be used to improve the expressivity of the initial version of GD with momentum.
Note that our discussion on preconditioning in Equation 39 is different from here and indicates that one can learn the
preconditioner as a proper mapping, while the above formulation shows when using preconditioning, momentum term (as
a memory for gradients) aims to map them to their mapping function.
Extension: More Expressive Objectives.Revisiting the formulation of momentum: for a given gradients ∇L(𝑊𝑖 ;𝒙𝑖),
the momentum mapping is based on dot-product similarity as the internal objective (as discussed above) and so its update
rule is a Hebbian-rule (Hebb 2005). From an associative memory perspective, this update rule has a limited capacity
(Storkey 1997) and makes the update rule of momentum independent of its current state. Thus it limits its ability to
track/compress the loss landscape information. A natural extension is to replace the internal objective with𝐿2-regression
loss (for measuring the corresponding key-value mapping fitness) and minimize the loss function∥𝒎∇L(𝑊𝑖 ;𝒙𝑖)⊤−𝑷𝑖∥2
2,
resulting in the update rule of:
𝑊𝑖+1 =𝑊𝑖+m𝑖+1,(48)
m𝑖+1 =m𝑖
 𝛼𝑖+1−∇L (𝑊𝑖 ;𝒙𝑖)⊤∇L(𝑊𝑖 ;𝒙𝑖)−𝜂𝑡𝑷𝑖∇L(𝑊𝑖 ;𝒙𝑖),(49)
This update is based on delta-rule (Prados et al. 1989) and so it allows the memory (momentum) to better manage its limited
capacity (i.e.,O(𝑁) ) and better memorize the series of past gradients. For example, we may learn to forget some of the
past gradients during the optimization process (similar to what happens when we move from linear attention to delta rule
in associate memory). We refer to the variants of this type of momentum term as Delta Momentum variants.
Extension: More Expressive Memory.Viewing momentum as a compressor or a memory that store past gradients into
its elements (parameters), its capacity not only depends on its update rule (similar to the above), but it also requires more
expressive structure that allows for larger capacity. The current formulation is based on a linear layer (i.e., matrix-valued)
to compress the past gradient values, but this linear nature may limit the capability to only learn linear mappings of past
gradients. To increase the learning capacity of this module, one can use more complex mappings such as replacing a linear
matrix-valued memory for momentum with an MLP. This design allows momentum to memorize more gradients and so
provides better information for the optimization process. We extend the formulation in Equation 33 as:
𝑊𝑖+1 =𝑊𝑖+m𝑖+1(𝒖𝑖),andm 𝑖+1 =𝛼𝑖+1 m𝑖−𝜂𝑡∇L(2)(𝒎𝑖 ;𝒖𝑖,1),(50)
where𝒖𝑖 =∇L (𝑊𝑖 ;𝒙𝑖) and∇L(2)(·) is the internal objective of momentum (e.g., dot product similarity ⟨𝒎(𝒖⊤
𝑖),1⟩ ).
We refer to this variant as Deep Momentum Gradient Descent (DMGD). While it is clear from this example, it is worth
emphasizing that the internal loss function and the model need to be designed carefully to obtain an effective momentum
module.
Extension: Memory with Higher-order Feature Maps.One of the commonly used techniques to enhance the capacity
of a memory is to use higher-order feature maps on the keys (Katharopoulos et al. 2020; Kacham et al. 2024). Using this
technique on the momentum term, one can obtain:
𝑊𝑖+1 =𝑊𝑖+m𝑖+1 andm 𝑖+1 =𝛼𝑖+1 m𝑖−𝜂𝑡𝑷𝑖𝜙(∇L(𝑊𝑖 ;𝒙𝑖)),(51)
where𝜙(·)is a higher-order feature mapping (that may be learned through its internal objective).
Extension: Nonlinear Outputs.Building upon the associative memory perspective of the momentum, one common
technique to enhance the representation power of memory module is to use non-linearity on top of its output (Sun et al.
2024; Behrouz et al. 2025c). That is, we re-formulate Equation 50 as:
𝑊𝑖+1 =𝑊𝑖+𝜎(m𝑖+1(𝒖𝑖)),andm 𝑖+1 =𝛼𝑖+1 m𝑖−𝜂𝑡∇L(2)(𝒎𝑖 ;𝒖𝑖,I),(52)
where𝜎(·) is an arbitrary non-linearity. As an example, we let𝜎(·)=NewtonSchulz(·) , whereNewton-Schulz(·) is the
iterative Newton-Schulz method (Higham 2008), and𝒎(·) be a linear layer; resulting in Muon (Jordan et al. 2024).
19
=== PAGE 20 ===
Figure 4: Optimization of function
𝝍(𝑟,𝜃) with standard momentum and
our delta momentum.
A Toy Example for Long Context in Optimizer.In Section 4.3, we discussed
that in complex setups, including continual learning with orthogonal tasks,
we may need more complex momentum terms, either with higher capacity or
better memory management. To better illustrate the potential gains of other
momentum memory designs, we use a toy example of a time-varying curvature.
Since the standard momentum acts as a low-pass filter, if the landscape changes
at a high frequency, then standard momentum which aims to use the weighted
average of past gradients, will be under the influence of irrelevant gradient
terms, delaying the convergence. As an illustrative example, consider:
𝝍(𝑟,𝜃)=𝑟 2+𝑘× (𝑟−𝜃+𝛼sin (𝜔𝑟)) 2,(53)
and aims to optimize it using a standard momentum and our delta momentum.
We start the optimization process from point(𝑟0,𝜃 0)=(− 3.5, 2) and continue
until one of the algorithms converge to the optimal solution. The result is visualized in Figure 4. The delta momentum
finds the solution faster, mainly due to its gradient-dependent weight decay that helps the momentum term to decay or
stop when it is needed.
4.5 Going Beyond Simple Gradient Descent and Momentum
Coming back to the discussion in Section 3.1 about the pre-training process and backpropagation being a form of associative
memory, in this section, we aim to take advantage of NL’s viewpoint and present a more general form for gradient descent.
As observed in Section 4.1, backpropagation with gradient descent is an associative memory that aims to map the input
data to the surprised caused by its predicted output∇ 𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡):
𝑊𝑡+1 =𝑊𝑡−𝜂𝑡+1∇𝑊L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡)=𝑊 𝑡−𝜂𝑡+1∇𝑦L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡)⊗𝒙 𝑡,where𝒙 𝑡 ∼D train,(54)
which from the associative memory perspective and proximal gradient viewpoint is equivalent to:
𝑊𝑡+1 =arg min
𝑊
⟨𝑊𝒙𝑡,∇𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡)⟩+ 1
2𝜂𝑡
∥𝑊−𝑊 𝑡∥2
2.(55)
This step aims at learning the negative of the gradient direction. The main drawback of the dot-product similarity as
the inner objective is that its corresponding update rule and so learning algorithm treats each data sample (gradients)
independent of the state, meaning that the state of the weights and so previous gradients do not affect the update term to
the current state. While this design can be effective for nested problems with independent elements in their context (e.g.,
i.i.d. samples for training), it can be restrictive for context with highly dependent elements (e.g., tokens in a sequence).
Definingu𝑡 =−∇ 𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡), one can extend this process to more expressive objectives such asL2 regression loss:
𝑊𝑡+1 =arg min
𝑊
1
2∥𝑊𝒙𝑡−u𝑡∥2
2+ 1
2𝜂𝑡
∥𝑊−𝑊 𝑡∥2
2.(56)
For the cases that𝒙𝑡 is normalized (e.g. in normalized memory systems or in neural networks with normalization layers,
∥𝒙𝑡∥2 =𝜆 ), and by defining𝜂′
𝑡 = 𝜂𝑡
1+𝜂𝑡
, we can use Sherman-Morrison lemma to get (see Appendix C for the details):
𝑊𝑡+1 =𝑊𝑡
 I−𝜂 ′
𝑡𝒙𝑡𝒙⊤
𝑡
−𝜂′
𝑡∇𝑊𝑡L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡)
=𝑊𝑡
 I−𝜂 ′
𝑡𝒙𝑡𝒙⊤
𝑡
−𝜂′
𝑡∇𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡)⊗𝒙 𝑡,where𝒙 𝑡 ∼D train.(57)
This new algorithm, which based on Delta rule (Prados et al. 1989) we refer to as Delta Gradient Descent (DGD), updates
the weights not only with respect to the current elements, but it also incorporates the previous state of weights, resulting
in an adaptive decay term based on the current data sample. Next, we discuss a generalized viewpoint about the process
of backpropagation with gradient descent, which later will help us to formulate Generalized Gradient Descent family of
learning rules:
20
=== PAGE 21 ===
Training a Deep Neural Network with Backpropagation is a Self-Referential Process:
As discussed earlier in Section 4.1, one common misinterpretation for gradient descent is to view it as a form of linear
recurrence (e.g., linear attention). In a conventional linear recurrence, however, keys and values are independent of the
state of the memory, and so allows for parallelization of the formulation. The values in “gradient descent as associative
memory” viewpoint are a function of the state of the memory, and so it is a self-referential model (Schmidhuber 1993)
that controls its own learning process by generating its own values. More formally, one can reformulate the process as:
𝑊𝑡+1 =𝑊𝑡+𝜂𝑡+1𝒗𝑡⊗𝒙 𝑡,(58)
𝒗𝑡 =𝒇𝑊𝑡(𝒙𝑡) =−∇ 𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡),
which means that at each step𝒗 𝑡 is generated by memory𝑊 𝑡 and𝒙 𝑡 as its input.
Based on the above interpretation, one can define backpropagation with gradient descent in a general form asanyself-
referential model that aims to compress training samples as keys and map them toself-generatedvalues to better control
its own learning process. Based on this definition, our above formulation of Appendix C, is only a simple instance that
usesL 2 regression loss; in general, however, one can define Generalized Gradient Descent (GGD) as:
Definition 5(Generalized Gradient Descent (GGD) Learning Rule).Generalized Gradient Descent (GGD) learning rule is a
self-referential associative memory that aims to compress data samples and map them to a set of self-generated keys:
𝑊𝑡+1 =arg min
𝑊
˜L(𝒙𝑡,𝒖𝑡)+Ret  𝑊,{𝑊 𝑖}𝑡
𝑖=𝑡−𝑐+1
,(59)
where𝒖 𝑡 is a self-generated value:
𝒖𝑡 =𝒇𝑊𝑡(𝒙𝑡),(60)
for some function𝒇𝑊𝑡(·) parameterized by𝑊𝑡 . Here, ˜L(·) measures the quality of the mapping, and Ret(·) ensures that the
solution for the new instance is not far away from the current state.
Similarly, this formulation can be adapted for the momentum term, resulting in Generalized Momentum (GM). However,
it is notable that the momentum itself, is a conventional associative memory and its keys and values are given, or more
specifically are generated by a lower-frequency level. In Section 4.2, we explored a special case of this formulation, where
L(·)is𝐿 2 regression loss.
A Note on Optimizers in Continual Learning Setup.As discussed above, optimizers themselves are learning modules
or associative memories that aim to compress the gradients into their parameters. These parameters are not necessarily
trainable in the conventional terminology but indeed momentum-based optimizers store the knowledge about the loss
landscape, helping them to better update the weights. When the “end of pretraining” happens for a neural learning module,
the knowledge stored about the distribution of gradients/data, which are stored in the momentum term(s) is removed from
the model and so continuing the training without recovering the momentum states can affect the model’s ability to learn
new capabilities. When the model is in continual learning setup, the knowledge about data is stored in the conventional
parameters (optimized with backpropagation), but the knowledge about how the model optimizes itself and about the
objective space are optimized in the lower-frequency levels of optimization (e.g., momentum terms).
5 Existing Architectures as Neural Learning Modules
Modern sequence models such as Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) and recurrent models (Katharopoulos et al. 2020;
Schlag et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2024; Behrouz et al. 2025c) are the backbones of recent advances in language models. Recently,
the equivalency of such models with associative memories that aim to learn a mapping from keys to values from data have
been studied in different settings and objectives (Liu et al. 2024b; Sun et al. 2024; Behrouz et al. 2025b; Wang et al. 2025).
Particularly, we focus on the general framework of Miras (Behrouz et al. 2025b), which defines associative memory as
Definition 1 and optimizes the internal objective (called “attentional bias”) with a choice of optimization algorithm on
an arbitrary class of functions (i.e., memory architecture). While this formulation alone indicates that the well-known
architectures are instances of nested systems of associative memory (NSAM), next, we review this equivalency for some
learning rules and architectures.
21
=== PAGE 22 ===
From now on, we assume that keys{𝒌𝑖}𝐿
𝑖=1, values{𝒗𝑖}𝐿
𝑖=1, and queries{𝒒𝑖}𝐿
𝑖=1 are given: they often are defined as the
projections of the input, i.e.,
𝒌𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒌,𝒗 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒗,𝒒 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒒.(61)
In this design, since projection parameters (i.e.,𝑊𝒌,𝑊𝒗, and𝑊𝒒) are optimized in a lower frequency level, the sequence
model component (e.g., self-attention) has a higher frequency and so the learning process of the associative memory
happens in a lower level. Accordingly, for the sake of clarity, we only discuss the higher frequency level (i.e., the internal
learning process of the associative memory).
Softmax Attention.From the associative memory viewpoint: given keys {𝒌𝑖}𝐿
𝑖=1, values{𝒗𝑖}𝐿
𝑖=1, and queries{𝒒𝑖}𝐿
𝑖=1,
Softmax attention block (Bahdanau 2014; Vaswani et al. 2017) can be reformulated as a non-parametric solution to the
ℓ2(·)regression objective with Nadaraya-Watson estimators (Fan 2018; Zhang et al. 2022):
M∗ =arg min
M
𝐿∑︁
𝑖=1
s(𝒌𝑖,𝒒)∥𝒗 𝑖−M∥ 2
2 =
𝐿∑︁
𝑖=1
s(𝒌𝑖,𝒒)
˝𝐿
𝑗=1 s(𝒌𝑗,𝒒)
𝒗𝑖,(62)
where𝐿 is the sequence length (Sun et al. 2024). This formulation optimizes the memoryM(·) with respect to the entire
context; however, one design choice can be to limit the optimization process to the past𝑐tokens, resulting in:
M∗ =arg min
M
𝑡∑︁
𝑖=𝑡−𝑐+1
s(𝒌𝑖,𝒒𝑖)∥𝒗𝑖−M∥ 2
2 =
𝑡∑︁
𝑖=𝑡−𝑐+1
s(𝒌𝑖,𝒒)˝𝑡
𝑗=𝑡−𝑐+1 s(𝒌𝑗,𝒒)𝒗𝑖,(63)
which is equivalent to the sliding window attention (SWA). Therefore, attention and its more expressive variants (Wang
et al. 2025) also are instances of Definition 1, when instead of gradient descent or other parametric methods, we find the
optimal non-parametric solution to the mapping.
RNNs with Hebbian Rule.The first generation of modern recurrent architectures (e.g., Linear attention (Katharopoulos
et al. 2020), RetNet (Sun et al. 2023), RWKV (Peng et al. 2023), lightening attention (Li et al. 2025)) are based on Hebbian-like
learning rules (Hebb 2005). For this class of models, the inner objective to measure the quality of mapping between keys
and values is the dot-product similarity. That is, given a matrix-valued memoryM∈R 𝑑×𝑛 , keys and values𝒌,𝒗∈R 𝑑,
objective ˜L(M ;𝒌𝑡,𝒗𝑡) :=− 2⟨M𝒌𝑡,𝒗𝑡⟩, and a kernel𝜙(·) , we optimize the equivalent associative memory optimization
problem (see Definition 1) with gradient descent and weight decay, resulting in:
M𝑡 =𝛼𝑡M𝑡−1−𝜂∇ M𝑡−1
˜L(M𝑡−1 ;𝜙(𝒌 𝑡),𝒗𝑡)
|                            {z                            }
−𝒗𝑡𝜙(𝒌⊤
𝑡)
=𝛼𝑡M𝑡−1+𝜂𝑡𝒗𝑡𝜙  𝒌⊤
𝑡
,(64)
which recovers the original linear attention recurrence (Katharopoulos et al. 2020). Given different settings for 𝛼𝑡 (i.e.,
either is1, learnable, channel-wise, and/or input-dependent) and also 𝜙(·) (i.e., identity, polynomial kernels, etc.), the
above recurrence recovers different variants of linear attention with Hebbian rule (Katharopoulos et al. 2020; Sun et al.
2023; Arora et al. 2024; Beck et al. 2024; Kacham et al. 2024; Peng et al. 2024). Therefore, the variants of linear attention
with Hebbian rule can be reformulated as the process of an optimization problem, in which the memory aims to learn the
mapping between keys and values based on dot-product similarity objective, with gradient descent.
RNNs with Delta Rule.To improve the memory management and to enhance the memory capacity of the above group,
several studies suggest replacing Hebbian rule with Delta rule as the learning algorithm in recurrent neural networks (Schlag
et al. 2021), resulting in models such as DeltaNet (Schlag et al. 2021), Longhorn (Liu et al. 2024b), and RWKV7 (Peng
et al. 2025b). When letting M∈R 𝑑×𝑛 , delta rule is equivalent to optimizing MSE objective ˜L𝑡 =∥M 𝑡𝒌𝑡−𝒗 𝑡∥2
2 with
Ret𝑡(M,M𝑡−1)=∥M 𝑡−M𝑡−1∥2
𝐹 as local retention, and stochastic gradient descent as the optimizer:
M𝑡 =M𝑡−1−𝜂𝑡∇M𝑡−1
˜L(M𝑡−1 ;𝜙(𝒌𝑡),𝒗𝑡)
|                              {z                              }
(M𝑡−1 𝒌𝑡−𝒗𝑡)𝒌⊤
𝑡
=  I−𝜂 𝑡𝒌𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡
M𝑡−1+𝜂𝑡𝒗𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡 .(65)
Using other forms of retention gates (e.g., Ret𝑡(M,M𝑡−1)=∥M 𝑡−𝛼𝑡M𝑡−1∥2
𝐹 ), optimization algorithms with weight
decay (e.g., regularizing with∥M𝑡∥𝑞
𝑞 for a given𝑞> 0), multiple steps of gradient descent, and/or different formulations of
22
=== PAGE 23 ===
learnable parameters such as𝜂𝑡 and𝛼𝑡 can result in diverse variants of delta rule (Irie et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2024b; Sun et al.
2024; Behrouz et al. 2025b; Hu et al. 2025; Peng et al. 2025b; Siems et al. 2025; Wang et al. 2025). Therefore, Delta rule and
its variants are all instances of an optimization problem, in which the model aims to learn a mapping between keys and
values based on the𝐿 2-regression objective.
Beyond Conventional Learning Rules: Omega, Oja’s, and Non-Euclidean Learning Rules.More recently, there
have been growing interests in designing architectures from the associative memory perspective (see Definition 1) and
use more complex internal objectives, and/or optimization algorithms, resulting in learning algorithms beyond Delta
and Hebbian rules (Irie et al. 2022a; Von Oswald et al. 2023; Behrouz et al. 2025a,b; Zhang et al. 2025). More specifically,
to enhance the stability of Hebbian rule (discussed in Equation 64), Irie et al. (2022a) introduced OjaNet based on Oja’s
rule (Oja 1982) with the following recurrence:
M𝑡 =𝛼𝑡M𝑡−1+𝜂𝑡𝒗𝑡
 𝜙(𝒌𝑡)⊤−M⊤
𝑡−1𝒗𝑡
.(66)
In the associative memory formulation (as in Definition 1), this recurrence can simply be reformulated as one step of
gradient descent as:
M𝑡 =M𝑡−1−𝜂𝑡∇M𝑡−1
˜L(M𝑡−1 ;𝜙(𝒌𝑡),𝒗𝑡)
|                              {z                              }
M⊤
𝑡−1 𝒗𝑡−𝒗𝑡𝜙(𝒌𝑡)⊤
,(67)
where ˜L(M ;𝒌𝑡,𝒗𝑡)=− 2⟨M𝒌𝑡,𝒗𝑡⟩+∥M ⊤𝒗𝑡∥2
2 and𝜙(·) is a kernel (Irie et al. 2022a, 2025b). Although this design enhances
the Hebbian learning rule by enforcing a unit-norm constraint for the single-neuron, it has been reported to empirically
underperform models based on Delta learning rule (Irie et al. 2022a). To further enhance the Delta rule through the design
of more expressive objectives, recently, Behrouz et al. (2025b) suggested going beyond Euclidean spaces and use𝐿𝑝 =∥·∥ 𝑝
𝑝
norm for the internal regression objective, showing better empirical performance and robustness in long context tasks
compared to Delta rule and its variants.
While the majority of learning rules are online update mechanisms–meaning that at each state, the models only need to
keep the memory and thecurrent(batch of) input–Omega rule (Behrouz et al. 2025a) suggest an update rule based on a
set of past (batches of) inputs (or all inputs). More specifically, given a memoryM with an arbitrary structure, keys and
values𝒌,𝒗∈R 𝑑, an arbitrary objective ˜L(M;𝒌 𝑡,𝒗𝑡), and a kernel𝜙(·), Omega rule is defined as:
M𝑡 =𝛼𝑡M𝑡−1−
𝑡∑︁
𝑖=𝑡−𝑐+1
𝛾𝑡,𝑖 ˜L(M𝑡 ;𝜙(𝒌 𝑖),𝒗𝑖),(68)
where𝑐≥ 1is the local window of cached inputs. Note that in the special case of 𝛾𝑡,𝑖 = 1and 𝑐 equal to the entire context
length, the optimal solution of the above design collapses into an online case, where the update rule only depends on the
current state and the current input (Von Oswald et al. 2023). For further discussion with more details about representing
architectures as associative memories and so an optimization problem, we refer the reader to Behrouz et al. (2025b).
A Note on Gating in Modern Sequence Models.One of the recent architectural changes in modern language models is
the gating of a linear layer’s output with the output of the sequence model. Despite significant improvement resulted by
this method, it is still unclear that how it enhances the performance. As we discussed in Figure 3 and its corresponding
example, the main difference between feedforward network and modern recurrent memory modules (e.g., linear atten-
tion (Katharopoulos et al. 2020) or deep memory modules (Behrouz et al. 2025c)) when their initial state of the memory is
meta-learned, is the second level in memory modules that perform in-context learning and adapt its state with the context.
From this viewpoint, when the initial value of the memory is not meta-learned, it only relies on the in-context adaption of
the memory and so there is no persistent memory system that stores the knowledge of pre-training in this block. Therefore,
when the initial value of memory is not meta-learned, which is common in earlier variants of linear transformers, the
gating of linear attention acts as a persistent memory and the initialization of the memory module.
5.1 Revisiting the Human Brain Perspective of Nested Learning
In Section 1.1, we discussed how structure in human brain is uniform and reusable, and if we need a new architecture in
deep learning, or if our beliefs about the heterogeneity of current models need to be revisited. In the previous sections,
23
=== PAGE 24 ===
we observed that both optimization process of neural networks as well as neural architectures can be formulated as a set
of nested and/or parallel optimization problems, in which the memory structure is a feedforward layer (e.g., either Deep
MLPs, linear layers, etc.) and the objective is optimized with gradient descent or Newton’s methods.
From this perspective, modern architectures, are a set of artificial neurons (i.e., linear or deep feedforward networks), and
each group of neurons has their own internal objective and so update mechanism. To this end, as a simple example, let us
recall the AdaTransformer in Figure 3: Given𝑋={𝒙 𝑖}𝑇
𝑖=1 as the input sequence, the output of the block is computed as
(For the sake of simplicity, we assumeMLP(·)=·𝑊 MLP , and remove normalizations):
𝒌𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒌,𝒗 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒗,𝒒 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒒,
𝒚attn,𝑡 =Attn(𝒌𝑡,𝒗𝑡,𝒒𝑡),
𝒚block,𝑡 =𝒚 attn,𝑡𝑊LinAttn,𝑡,where
𝑊LinAttn,𝑡 =𝑊LinAttn,𝑡−1+𝒗𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡 ,(69)
The lowest frequency level is responsible for the optimization of𝑊 𝒌,𝑊 𝒗, and𝑊 𝒒, all of which are feedforward networks
and so are uniform. The attention itself is also the non-parametric matrix-valued solution of a regression objective, again
verifying that the structure is a matrix of artificial neurons (i.e., parameters). Finally, the Linear Attention++ component is
equivalent to the optimizing the dot-product similarity of the mappings over the linear class of functions. Therefore, all
the parameters are matrix-valued or deep feedforward layers, meaning that the only difference in the components of an
architecture is their level, objective, and/or learning update rule.
Modern Deep Learning Models Have Uniform and Reusable Structure
Neural learning modules consist of a set of feedforward networks, each of which are optimized in different levels
and time scales. The heterogeneity we observe in deep learning architectures, however, is due to the lack of view
to this new NL’s axis, resulting in observing only the solution of optimization problems and so causing the illusion
of deep learning architectures.
6 Takeaways and Revisiting Common Terms
In the previous sections, we discussed the concept of nested learning and how existing well-known components of neural
networks such as popular optimizers and architectures fall under the NL paradigm. In this section, we discuss the takeaways,
connection of different concepts, and the implications of NL perspective on common terms.
Memory and Learning.For a long period of time, in machine learning models, memory have been treated as a separate
block with acleardistinction between its parameters and other components. Such designs often assume a short and/or
long-term memory blocks, where short-term memory is responsible for the local context, while long-term memory is
the storage for the persistent knowledge in models. In human brain, however, memory is considered as a distributed
interconnected system without a clear known components that are independently responsible for short or long-term
memory. In NL, we build upon a common terminology for memory and learning in neuropsychology literature, indicating
that: Memory is a neural update caused by an input and so learning is the process of acquiring useful memory (Okano
et al. 2000). From this viewpoint, any update by gradient descent (or any other optimization algorithms) in any levels of
neural learning module is considered as a form of memory. Interestingly, our findings in Section 4.1 on gradient descent
being (self-referential) associative memory is aligned with this terminology. Furthermore, based on this terminology,
in continuum memory system, the neural updates are applied at different frequencies and so memories are stored with
different time scales, resulting in more robust memory management with respect to catastrophic forgetting.
Memory and Learning from Nested Learning Perspective:
Memory is not an isolated system and is distributed throughout the parameters. Particularly, any update that is
caused by the input is a stored memory in the neural network, and the process of effectively store, encode, and in
general acquire such memories is referred to as learning process.
24
=== PAGE 25 ===
A General Note on Parameters of a Model.The parameters of a model are one of its critical components that shape
the units for knowledge storage, internal computations, and adaptability. Over the past decades, only (a subset of) the
parameters in the architecture of machine learning models have been referred to as thelearnableentities, mainly due to the
fact that they are the only components that we have been directly and intentionally optimizing over the training data. From
the NL viewpoint, such parameters are placed in the lowest frequency level (the highest level) and are updated for every
(batch of) samples. They are, however, are not the only parameters that contributes to the model internal computation,
knowledge storage, and adaptability. As discussed earlier in Section 4.2, momentum is an example of such cases, where its
parameters are updated over time (by gradient descent) and stores the knowledge about the loss landscape of the model so
far. Such information are critical when the model is continually learn, mainly due to the fact that to find an effective solution,
the optimizer needs to have more information about the global properties of the loss landscape. Another example of such
cases is the memory (or hidden state) of recurrent neural networks. Although those parameters are not directly optimized in
the lowest frequency level, they store important knowledge about the current context. With the change of the context, the
compressed knowledge in these parameters are removed due to the lack of knowledge transfer between these levels.
Models Have More Parameters Than We Knew:
The parameters of a neural learning module are not limited to those optimized in the pre-training level; all parameters
that appear in the NL representation of the model contribute to its performance and expressivity.
More Computations per Neuron.One common misinterpretation about the concept of NL is to restrict the model
design and stacking multiple levels to CMS case. In general, stacking levels can help the model to enhance the depth
of computations and also perform more internal computations per each parameter in the lowest frequency level. One
example of such designs is Muon optimizer andNewtonSchulz𝑘(·) operation (see Equation 42 - 44), which we showed that
is equivalent to an internal optimization process. In this design, per each step of momentum update, we need𝑘-steps of
internal process to learn how to map gradients to an orthogonal space.
In-Context Learning.Throughout this paper, we use the most general definition of “in-context learning” and refer to it as
the ability of a model to adapt to and learn from a given context. Following the definition of NSAM, each block or level has
its own context flow and so any neural update or adaptation to that context is considered as a form of in-context learning.
Due to the popularity of Transformers as well as being the first model that in-context learning is studied for, the concept of
in-context learning sometimes is referred to as conditioning the output on the entire context. Considering the general
term of in-context learning, this formulation is only one of the instances of in-context learning, which we referred to as
non-parametric in-context learning. In general, however, the memory in recurrent models is performing in-context learning,
in which the output is conditioned on thecompressed context. Therefore, from NL perspective, all the levels are performing
in-context learning but on their own context flow with their own learning update and optimization process.
Building on this definition, in-context learning is a model’s capability that is transparent from its NL representation, and
per se it is not an emergent characteristic but a direct consequence of having multiple levels in the NL representation of
the neural learning module. Although this might seem contradictory with previous claims about ICL being an emergent
characteristic (Brown et al. 2020; Singh et al. 2023), it is notable that the good performance of the model in ICL tasks also
requires a powerful low-frequency level, enabling the high frequency level to adapt fast. When the model is not well-trained,
the higher-frequency level is on its own to learn from the context. This setup might result in a poor performance, mainly
due to the fact that there might be not enough data in context to allow the high-frequency parameters to converge.
(Test-Time) Learning/Memorization.Recently, the concept of test time training (Sun et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2025) or
test time memorization (Behrouz et al. 2025b) has gained popularity as a backbone framework to design powerful sequence
models. In these frameworks, given the context, a new component/block aims to compress the context into its parameters
using a learning rule and objective function. In this formulation when the context is removed the acquired in-context
knowledge diminishes along with it. As also discussed in the previous part, this update mechanism and learning process is
indeed an instance of“parametric in-context learning”:
Test Time Training/Memorization are Instances of In-Context Learning
The concepts commonly referred to as test-time training and test-time memorization are in fact instances of parametric
in-context learning, where the acquired in-context knowledge does not persist once the current context is removed.
25
=== PAGE 26 ===
Notably, when moving toward continual learning setup, there is no test-time or training-time and so it can be misleading
to refer to (parametric) in-context learning as test-time learning/memorization.
Pre-training and Test Time.From the nested learning perspective, the lowest frequency level (i.e., the highest level)
corresponds to a learning phase that is often referred to as pre-training. Accordingly, pre-training is one of the levels and
so has its own context flow (i.e., pre-training dataset), objective (e.g., next token prediction), and optimization process (e.g.,
AdamW). Accordingly, one can interpret the pre-training as one of the possible instances of in-context learning, where the
context is the entire pre-training data.
Pre-training is In-Context Learning with Ultra-Large Context Length:
From NL’s viewpoint pre-training is only one of the possible instances of in-context learning, where the context is the
entire pre-training data. The distinction of training and test time in models is the results of disconnecting the knowledge
transfer process from the highest frequency level (e.g., the context of Transformers) to the low frequency levels (i.e.,
pre-training).
This formulation and viewpoint is specifically important when we shift from pre-training paradigm to models that are
capable of continually interact and learn from data/world (e.g., Sutton (2025)):
Continual Learning.From NL’s perspective each phase of training for a model is defined as one of the low-frequency
levels, which by design, we might want to stop the data processing in one level (e.g., “End of Pre-training”), or continue it
without any knowledge transfer to other levels (e.g., conventional formulation of in-context learning in Transformers).
Accordingly, any machine learning model, no matter if it is during its pre-training or at test time, is performing continual
learning as given a data sample, it requires performing internal computations to provide the output. However, the
knowledge from that learning might not last or transfer to more persistent levels, mainly due to the lack of knowledge
transfer between levels.
No Training or Test Time in Neural Learning Modules:
For a neural learning module, there is no boarder and clear distinction between training and test time. The model only
experiences two different states: when it receives information as input, or when it is an isolated learning system.
We also revisit some of the common terms in the architectural design in the following:
Existing Architectural Backbones and Hybrid Models.As discussed earlier in Section 5.1, from the NL’s perspective
all modern architectures are uniform and in fact are feedforward layers (linear or non-linear MLP blocks) that are trained
based on their own context flow and optimization problem. When viewing models from deep learning perspective, we see
the final solution of such optimization problem (i.e., we see attention rather than a non-parametric solution to a regression
loss), which results in the illusion of having distinct and non-uniform architectures.
Recurrent Models are Replacing MLP Blocks:
From NL’s viewpoint, (deep or linear memory) recurrent models are MLP blocks that a new level is added to their
internal computation. Accordingly, existing hybrid architectures can be seen as conventional Transformer models,
when we added a new level of computation to some of the MLP blocks.
Another important aspect of understanding the existing architectures during their so-called “pre-training” phase is to
understand how they transfer their knowledge from one level to another.
Knowledge Transfer from In-Context Learning
Although both modern deep and linear recurrent models are unified using associative memory perspective, there is
still an important difference between the existing instances: While deep memory modules such as Titans, Atlas, Miras,
and TTT take advantage of knowledge transfer from their high-frequency level to their lower-frequency level through
meta-learning the initial state of memory, most linear memory recurrent models have no knowledge transfer process
between their levels.
26
=== PAGE 27 ===
Neural Learning Module as an Inter-Connected System.One of the critical messages in NL is the fact that neural
learning modules are inter-connected systems, meaning that the design of each component can significantly affect the
design of other parts. This fact motivates follow up and future studies to better understand how one can properly design
a neural learning module with all components work together in a harmony. As an example of such, the context of
optimizers (i.e., gradients) is generated by the architecture component. Therefore, different architectures might show
different characteristics in the generated gradient patterns and so one optimizer might not be the best option for all the
architectures (Zhang et al. 2024b).
Architectures Generates the Context for Optimizers
Neural learning modules are inter-connected systems, where architecture generates the context for optimizers (i.e.,
gradients). Therefore, the proper memory management of gradients (i.e., optimization algorithm) relies on the choice of
architectures. In future, when viewing models as a neural learning modules, we need to design architecture specific
optimizers so this inter-connected system works perfectly in harmony.
Optimizers vs. Learned Optimizers.Finally, we want to emphasize that our formulation of momentum, gradient descent,
and/or other gradient-based optimizers show that they are associative memory modules aiming to compress the data
and gradients into their parameters. Such update and compression process is based on gradient descent and so has a
very similar nature to the learning process of learned optimizers. From the NL’s viewpoint, both vanilla optimizers as
well as learned optimizers are instances of the same concept but with different frequency and context flow: Although the
parameters of learned optimizers are located in the lowest frequency level (i.e., to train and be optimized along with other
parameters in the pre-training), the parameters of vanilla optimizers are located in their own level and so has their own
gradient flow.
7 Continuum Multi-Timescale Memory System
Existing architectural backbones consist of (1) aworking memorymodule (e.g., attention), which is responsible to actively
fuse the information across sequence length, and (2) a feed-forward layer (e.g., MLP) that fuse information across features
and acts as the persistent memory or knowledge storage of pre-training phase. From the NL perspective, pre-training is
the phase that the most outer level of the learning module is updated over itslimitedcontext flow. Accordingly, in the
continual setup, such pre-training phase is also rarely updated over time, and so its corresponding knowledge storage
needs to rarely be updated over time. Given this intuition, we extend the traditional view-point of long-term/short-term
memory system and suggest a knowledge storage feed-forward for each level (frequency domain).
7.1 Continuum Memory System (CMS)
Given the definition of frequency (Definition 2), Continuum Memory System (CMS) is formalized as a chain of MLP
blocks MLP(𝑓 1)(·),...,MLP (𝑓𝑘)(·), each of which associated with a chunk size of 𝐶(ℓ) := max𝑖𝐶(𝑖)
𝑓ℓ
such that given input
𝑥={𝒙 1,...,𝒙 𝑇}the output of the chain is calculated as (we disregard normalizations for the sake of clarity):
𝒚𝑡 =MLP(𝑓𝑘)(MLP(𝑓𝑘−1)(···MLP (𝑓 1)(𝒙𝑡))),(70)
where the parameters ofℓ-th MLP block, i.e.,𝜽 (𝑓ℓ), are updated every𝐶(ℓ) steps:
𝜽(𝑓ℓ)
𝑖+1 =𝜽 (𝑓ℓ)
𝑖 −
(˝𝑖
𝑡=𝑖−𝐶(ℓ) 𝜂(ℓ)
𝑡 𝑓(𝜽 (𝑓ℓ)
𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡)if𝑖≡0(mod𝐶 (ℓ)),
0otherwise. (71)
Here𝜂(ℓ)
𝑡 are learning rates corresponds to𝜽(𝑓ℓ), and𝑓(·) is the error component of an arbitrary optimizer (e.g.,∇L(𝜽(𝑓ℓ)
𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡)
in gradient descent). The conventional Transformer block (Vaswani et al. 2017) is a special instance of this formulation,
where𝑘= 1and frequency of update is zero. Note that the objective of L(·) is the objective of choice for the task at
hand, e.g., for language modeling it is next token prediction objective. It is notable that Equation 71 provides an important
interpretation: parameters𝜽(𝑓ℓ)
𝑡 are responsible for compressing their own context into the their parameters and so they
are a representative of abstract knowledge of their context.
27
=== PAGE 28 ===
As discussed in Section 3.3, different levels might have different process of knowledge transfer. Accordingly, while the
above formulation suggests a spectrum of memory systems in different levels and so with different frequencies, their
connections can vary based on the design. In the following, we discuss some potential variants:
Nested Continuum Memory Systems.The first variant is a fully nested continuum memory system, in which the initial
state of the MLP block in level𝑠+ 1is meta-learned in level 𝑠. This design allows for higher-order in-context learning
ability, where each of the levels has its own context flow and re-initialized after the end of the context. More specifically,
given an arbitrary1≤𝑠≤𝑘,
𝜽(𝑓𝑠+1)
0 =arg min
Φ
ET∼C(𝑠)
"
ℓ(Θ,T;Φ)
#
,(72)
whereC(𝑠) is the context length of the MLP block in𝑠-th level. Following this design, at the end of the optimization process
of each block (i.e., after⌈𝐶(𝑠)/𝐶(𝑠+1)⌉ steps.) the value of the memory will be re-initialized to𝜽(𝑓𝑠+1)
0 . Note that the update
mechanism of each block in its own level remain unchanged (i.e., Equation 71).
Sequential Continuum Memory Systems.In the second variant, the MLP blocks are located sequentially (i.e., the
output of the MLP block in level𝑠 is the input for the MLP block in level𝑠+ 1) and also the initial state of MLP blocks are
all connected through backpropagation in the lowest frequency level. Given an arbitrary1≤𝑠≤𝑘,
𝜽(𝑓𝑠)
0 =arg min
Φ
ET∼C(1)
"
ℓ(Θ,T;Φ)
#
,(73)
whereC(1) is the context length of the MLP block in the lowest frequency level. Since the initial state of all memories are
meta-learned in the lowest frequency, the most persistent knowledge of all components is the compression of the same
context flow.
Independent (Head-wise) Continuum Memory Systems.In this variant, we keep the knowledge transfer process
in Equation 73, but change the output computation in Equation 70. While the previous formulation designs the memory
system as a sequence of blocks, and so making their input/out dependent to each other, this variant uses independent
blocks with different context length and then combine them using an aggregation process:
𝒚𝑡 =Agg

MLP(𝑓𝑘)(𝒙𝑡),MLP(𝑓𝑘−1)(𝒙𝑡),···,MLP (𝑓 1)(𝒙𝑡)

.(74)
The above Agg(·) is an arbitrary function that aggregates all the inputs to compute the output. For example, one
straightforward and simple design choice is to use a learnable weighted sum of the input.
CMS Design Helps with Continual Learning.Based on the design of CMS, a fair question is to ask: Why and how
CMS can help with longer context length and generally continual learning. Here, we provide a simple answer to this
question: Viewing MLP blocks in CMS as the storage of model’s knowledge catastrophic forgetting can happen when we
update a block and as its result, the old knowledge stored in its parameters are forgotten. In CMS design, however, when
updating an arbitrary block of MLP(𝑓𝑠)(·) for some1 ≤𝑠≤𝑘 , the potentially forgotten knowledge fromMLP(𝑓𝑠)(·) is still
stored in other components such as MLP(𝑓𝑠′)(·), where𝑠′ <𝑠 . Also, in this case (i.e., the knowledge is already forgotten
from MLP(𝑓𝑠)(·) but it is still in MLP(𝑓𝑠′)(·) for𝑠′ <𝑠 ) the knowledge transfer through backpropagation (for their initial
state) can circle back the knowledge toMLP(𝑓𝑠)(·), resulting in a loop through time dimension, and so hardly forgetting
important knowledge.
Is CMS Efficient Enough?A common concern when updating the parameters of a model in a continual manner is its
efficiency. Therefore, a fair question is to ask if CMS causes significant computational overhead for the model. To answer
this question, let us recall from Section 5 that modern recurrent neural networks are also continually updating a subset of
their parameters (i.e., their memory state). These parameter updates, however, take advantage of sequence parallelization
as well as updating only a small number of parameters. To this end, for CMS, we highlight two points:
• In the CMS design, at each time, updates are restricted to blocks approaching their scheduled update time (based on
their frequency). As a simple example, consider a Transformers but with replacing its MLP blocks with CMS (later in
28
=== PAGE 29 ===
Section 8, refer to this variant asHope-Attention). Let the model have 𝐿layer layers, 4 levels of MLP blocks in CMS
with highest frequency of ˆ𝑓 , and hidden dimension of𝑑in. On average, the update cost is forO

1
ˆ𝑓×
𝐿layer
5 ×𝑑 2
in

of
parameters, which consists of only a small number of parameters at each time.
• The update mechanism of Equation 71, not only helps with the enhancing the persistent memory of the model,
but it also unlocks the sequence parallelization for higher frequency levels. More specifically, for input 𝒙𝑖 when
𝑖. 0(mod𝐶(ℓ)) there is no sequential process inside the chunk and so all the computations for tokens correspond
to different values of𝑖. 0(mod𝐶(ℓ)) can be done in parallel. The details of such training algorithm is the same as
the training procedure in Sun et al. (2024) and Behrouz et al. (2025c).
Therefore, in summary, CMS can be fast in practice, mainly due to the fact that it updates only small number of parameters
at each time, and also its design unlocks sequence parallelization.
7.2 Continuum Memory System In Optimizers Algorithm 1Multi-scale Momentum Muon (M3)
Input: Initial weights 𝚯0, objectiveL(·) , learning rate
𝜂> 0, Newton–Schulz steps𝑇 , momentum factor
1>𝛽 1,𝛽 2,𝛽 3,𝛼≥0,𝜖>0, frequency𝑓;
1:Initialize momentums:𝑴 (1)
0 ,𝑴(2)
0 ←0,𝑽 0←0;
2:forlower-frequency iteration𝑘=0,1,2,...do
3:Slow Memory:𝑴 (2)
𝑡 =𝑴 (2)
𝑡−1+𝛽 3
˝𝑘 𝑓
𝑖=(𝑘−1)𝑓 𝒈𝑖;
4:𝑶 (2)
𝑡 ←Newton–Schulz𝑇

𝑴(2)
𝑡

;
5:for𝑡=𝑘 𝑓+1,𝑘 𝑓+2,...,(𝑘+1)𝑓do
6:Compute Gradient:𝒈 𝑡 =∇ 𝚯𝑡L(𝚯𝑡);
7:First Momentum:𝑴 (1)
𝑡 =𝑴 (1)
𝑡−1+𝛽 1𝒈𝑡;
8:Second Momentum:𝑽 𝑡 =𝑽𝑡−1+𝛽 2𝒈2
𝑡 ;
9:𝑶 (1)
𝑡 ←Newton–Schulz𝑇

𝑴(1)
𝑡

;
10:𝚯 𝑡←𝚯 𝑡−1−𝜂 𝑶(1)
𝑡 +𝛼𝑶 (2)
𝑡√𝑽𝑡+𝜖 ;
11:end for
12:end for
As a proof of concept and to support the effectiveness of CMS
in different context flows, in this section we present Multi-scale
Momentum/Memory Muon (M3) optimizer. Particularly, we aim
to use NL’s associative memory viewpoint to design an optimizer
that not only compress the recent gradients effectively, but it
also has a capability of incorporating the information about long
past gradients. In Appendix B (Equation 101) we discuss that
how Adam optimizer is an instance of associative memory, in
which the gradients are mapped to their variance until that point.
Following the discussion about the need of long-context capability
of optimizers in Section 4.3, we first replace the simple associative
memory formulation of𝐻 term in Equation 102 with our CMS
(independent variant, Equation 74) with a two-level memory
system, which we refer to the memories as𝑴(1) and𝑴(2) :
𝑴(1)
𝑡 =𝑴 (1)
𝑡−1+𝛽 1𝒈𝑡,
𝑴(2)
𝑡 =𝑴 (2)
𝑡 −𝛽 2
( ˝𝑡
𝑖=𝑡− ˆ𝐶𝒈𝑖 if𝑡≡0(mod ˆ𝐶)
0otherwise, (75)
where ˆ𝐶 is the chunk size that we update the lower-frequency momentum term. Finally, to aggregate the momentum
terms (the choice ofAgg(·)in Equation 74), we use a simple weighted summation with the use of parameter𝛼>0as the
coefficient of𝑴(2)
𝑡 . Following our discussion on the importance of Newton-Schulz𝑇(·) to map the gradients to a proper
metric space (see Section 4.2 and Equation 43), following Muon (Jordan et al. 2024), we use Newton-Schulz𝑇(·) on the
output of the momentum terms, before aggregating them with weighted sum. This helps the associative memory to better
manage its capacity by updating its parameters in a proper direction. The pseudocode for M3 is in Figure 1. In summary,
one can say that M3 is the combination of Adam (Kingma et al. 2014a), Muon (Jordan et al. 2024), and our Continuum
Memory System.
Notably, this optimizer is designed as a proof-of-concept to support the design of CMS. The M3 optimizer per se, however,
might suffer from computational overhead and so face challenges when scaling to larger networks (see Figure 12).
Furthermore, it is notable that the main point of M3 design based on CMS is to delay the update of the memory to gain
longer-context. Similar studies such as the work of Devan Selvaraj (2025) and Pagliardini et al. (2025), while using multiple
momentum terms, approach this long-context momentum for optimizers using a controlled learning rate for the additional
momentum terms.
7.3 Ad-hoc Level Stacking: Initializing CMS with Pre-Trained Models
In our discussion on Figure 3, we observed that the initial state of the memory modules are optimized in lower-frequency
levels and so one can interpret them as MLP blocks in the vanilla Transformer architectures (Vaswani et al. 2017). Therefore,
a natural question is if we can leverage pre-trained models to initialize CMS blocks. One of the important advantages
29
=== PAGE 30 ===
Figure 5: A comparison of Hope architectural backbone with Transformers (Normalization and potential data-dependent
components are removed for the sake of clarity).
of NL is its flexibility to view and modify parameters in different levels. That is, since each level has its own context
flow and optimization process, one can simply initialize the parameters in each level independently so that it helps the
model to adapt faster to the levels’ context flow. To this end, in this section, we suggest initializing the parameters in a
level with a model’s pre-trained weights. More formally, given a CMS with{MLP(𝑓𝑖)(·)}𝑘
𝑖=1, and a set of pre-trained MLP
blocks{MLPpre-trained𝑖(·)}𝑘
𝑖=1 we use Equation 71 to update{MLP(𝑓𝑖)(·)}𝑘
𝑖=1 in different levels; we, however, use the trained
parameters of{MLP pre-trained𝑖(·)}𝑘
𝑖=1 as the initial state of CMS blocks:MLP(𝑓𝑖)
0 (·)=MLP pre-trained𝑖(·).
Why This Initialization Should Work?In NL, when there is a knowledge transfer process between two levels, the
higher frequency level can take advantage of the knowledge stored in the lower frequency level and so adapt faster to its
own context flow. The internal learning rate in the higher-frequency level, however, can control the capacity of the model
for adaptability. That is, consider the above case, where all the blocks are initialized with pre-trained MLP blocks, setting
𝜂(ℓ)
𝑡 → 0keeps the updated memory blocks close to their initial states, resulting in directly using of pre-trained blocks,
without adaption. Later in Section 9, we use this method to adapt pre-trained Transformer architectures to theHope’s
setup.
8 Hope: A Self-Referential Learning Module with Continuum Memory
As we discussed earlier in Section 5.1, architectures in nested learning are uniform, i.e., a set of feedforward neural network
blocks, each of which with its own context, update frequency, and internal objective. Sequence models–a common term to
refer to blocks often with the highest update frequency that fuse information across tokens in the input sequence–are
critical components for memory management and in-context learning ability of models. Following our earlier discussion in
Section 5, modern sequence models can be seen as associative memories and so are nested optimization problems. From this
perspective, global softmax attention or its more expressive higher-order variants are perfect memories (forcing to cache
all past tokens) with frequency update of infinity as they are non-parametric solutions for optimizing (local)𝐿2-regression
objective with Nadaraya-Watson estimators (Fan 2018; Zhang et al. 2022) (see Equation 62). Therefore, parametric solutions
(e.g., modern RNNs) for the similar objectives and when the parameter search space are the same (i.e., matrix-valued
memory) are not expected to outperform softmax attention when the model size and data scales. To this end, and to
design powerful sequence models, we need to understand where Transformers are limited and how one can overcome such
limitations.
From the nested learning perspective, Transformers are two-level components, where projections and MLP blocks are
optimized in the first level and the second level is responsible for in-context learning with finding the non-parametric
solution and so conditioning the output on the context. This design, however, has limited computational depth as also
stated in recent studies on state-tracking and similar computational capabilities of models (Merrill et al. 2024; Sanford
et al. 2024; Grazzi et al. 2025). Furthermore, Transformers’ parameters are static throughout their context, meaning that
their found solution to map tokens in the context (since it is non-parametric solution) remains the same and so they lack
30
=== PAGE 31 ===
the ability to modify themselves (at least in-context). More specifically, the initial linear blocks, 𝑊𝒌,𝑊 𝒗, and𝑊𝒒, that
projects input data to keys, values, and queries, are fixed after the pre-training stage (i.e., are in the first level) and so the
Transformer’s ability to contextualize and map tokens is bounded by the knowledge stored in these blocks. For example,
given a 1-layer Transformer, the projection of each token is a function of the token itself and its position; therefore, as an
example, it can miss the diverse possible encodings of words whose meaning depend on the context, rather than the word
itself. Although with increasing the depth of the model this issue might fade in later layers, we should not rely on the depth
to compensate the models ability as it still is a bottleneck to unleash the capability of the model in earlier layers.
To overcome the above challenge, recently, the use of short convolutions and canon layers (Allen-Zhu 2025) have became a
de facto component in modern models. Despite their success in mixing local tokens, still the models are fundamentally
limited to adapt to the context and capture the global information beyond the local mixing. In the next part, we discuss a
fundamental solution by presenting self-referential Titans that allows all the components to perform in-context learning,
and adapt and modify themselves:
8.1 Deep Self-Referential Titans
A general formulation for the associative memory-based blocks is to project the data into keys, values, and queries and
learns how to map keys to values and how to retrieve from the mapping based on queries. More formally, for a parametric
associative memory, let𝒙𝑡∈R 𝑑 for𝑡=1,...,𝐿be the input, we have:
𝒌𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒌,𝒗 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒗,𝒒 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒒, 𝜂 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝜂, 𝛼 𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝛼,(76)
min
M
L(M;𝒌𝑡,𝒗𝑡),with an optimization algorithm (77)
𝒚𝑡 =M𝑡𝒒𝑡 . (78)
For the sake of clarity, we use red (resp. blue) to highlight computations/weight in the upper level (resp. lower level).
Similar to example in Figure 3, we can add a new level for each of𝑊𝒌,𝑊 𝒗,𝑊 𝒒,𝑊𝜂, and𝑊𝛼 and allow them to be updated
in-context. For the sake of efficiency, a simple version is to share the values for all the components in the nested system of
associative memories:
𝒌𝑡 =M 𝒌,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡),𝒗 𝑡 =M 𝒗,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡),𝒒 𝑡 =M 𝒒,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡), 𝜂 𝑡 =M𝜂,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡), 𝛼 𝑡 =M𝛼,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡),(79)
min
M□
L(M□;□𝑡,𝒗𝑡),with an optimization algorithm,□∈{𝒌,𝒗,𝒒,𝜂,𝛼},(80)
min
Mmem
L(Mmem;𝒌𝑡,𝒗𝑡),with an optimization algorithm,(81)
𝒚𝑡 =M mem,𝑡(𝒒𝑡) , (82)
where the initial states of all memories, i.e., M□,0 for any □∈{𝒌,𝒗,𝒒,𝜂,𝛼,memory} are meta-learned across all se-
quences/contexts. As discussed earlier, the meta-learning of the initial states of memories is essential for both fast-adaption,
training stability, robustness to noise in the data.
This design provides a fully adaptive memory, where all the components can adapt themselves in-context. It, however,
(1) still lacks self-modification, where the model in response to new data changes its own parameters or learning pro-
cess (Schmidhuber 2003); (2) has suboptimal design as it shares of keys and values for all the memories. In continual
learning, where the model requires consistent weight/knowledge update in response to new data, it is critical for the model
to not solely rely on data, and instead learns how to modify itself when it is needed. Motivated by the above points, and
inspired by the self-modifying mechanisms that generate their own values based on the context (Schmidhuber 1993, 2003;
Irie et al. 2022b), we present self-modifying deep associative memory where the models generate their own values:
𝒚𝑡 =M memory,𝑡−1(𝒒𝑡),𝒌 𝑡 =M 𝒌,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡),𝒗 𝑡 =M 𝒗,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡), 𝜂 𝑡 =M𝜂,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡), 𝛼 𝑡 =M𝛼,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡),(83)
ˆ𝒗□,𝑡 =M □,𝑡−1(𝒗𝑡),(Generating its own values for each memory) (84)
min
M□
L  M□;𝒌𝑡, ˆ𝒗□,𝑡
,with an optimization algorithm,□∈{𝒌,𝒗,𝒒,𝜂,𝛼,memory},(85)
where𝒒𝑡 =𝒙𝑡𝑊𝒒 is the only non-adaptive projection,𝜂𝑡 is the learning rate in optimization process, and𝛼𝑡 is the retention
gate (forget gate or weight decay) in the optimization process. Note that, again, the initial states of all memories, i.e.,M□,0
31
=== PAGE 32 ===
for any □∈{𝒌,𝒗,𝒒,𝜂,𝛼,memory} are meta-learned across all sequences/contexts, and so are optimized in the higher
levels (or outer-loop).
Learning the mappings for associative memory modules (see Equation 85) requires a choice of optimization algorithm as
well as an objectiveL that measures the quality of mappings. A simple and common choice for objective and optimization
process are 𝐿2-regression loss, and gradient descent algorithm. As for the objective, we use 𝐿2-regression loss, i.e.,
L(M ;𝒌,𝒗)=∥M(𝒌)−𝒗∥ 2
2. As discussed earlier (see Section 4.5), the choice of optimizer highly depends on the context
of optimization. For example, gradient descent from associative memory perspective is based on dot-product similarity and
so the update at each step, is solely based on the input and does not incorporate the previous data samples to the update.
When performing optimization in the token space, however, we know tokens are highly correlated. Therefore, following
our discussion in Section 4.5, we use our DGD with weight decay, resulting in general update rule of:
𝒚𝑡 =M memory,𝑡−1(𝒒𝑡),𝒌 𝑡 =M 𝒌,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡),𝒗 𝑡 =M 𝒗,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡), 𝜂 𝑡 =M𝜂,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡), 𝛼 𝑡 =M𝛼,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡),(86)
ˆ𝒗□,𝑡 =M □,𝑡−1(𝒗𝑡),(Generating its own values for each memory) (87)
M□,𝑡 =M □,𝑡−1
 𝛼𝑡𝑰−𝜂 𝑡𝒌𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡
−𝜂𝑡∇LM□,𝑡−1
 M□,𝑡−1 ;𝒌𝑡, ˆ𝒗□,𝑡
,□∈{𝒌,𝒗,𝒒,𝜂,𝛼,memory}.(88)
Here, the architecture of the memories are arbitrary and even we are not forced to use the same architecture for all
components. We use a 2-layer MLP block as the architecture of all the memories:
M□(·)=(·)+𝑊 □,1𝜎(𝑊 □,2(·)).(89)
8.2 Fast and Parallelizable Training
In the above, we discussed how to design a model that can learn to generate its own latent values and so modify itself.
The main challenge from the practical point of view is the efficiency of the method and if its training is parallelizable. We
follow the chunk-wise training algorithm of non-linear update rules (Sun et al. 2024; Behrouz et al. 2025c) and use update
frequency of 𝑓□ = 𝐿
𝐶□
, where𝐿 is the context length. While there is no limitation to use different chunk-sizes, in our
experiments, we use two different value of chunk sizes, one for the update ofMmemory(·) and the other for all the other
memories in the self-referential Titans.
In more details, given an input sequence{𝒙𝑡}𝐿
𝑡=1 and chunk size1 ≤𝐶≤𝐿 , we split the sequence into⌈𝐿
𝐶⌉ chunks of
{𝒙((𝑖−1)𝐶+𝑡) }𝐶
𝑡=1 for𝑖= 1,...,⌈ 𝐿
𝐶⌉, and then generate all elements in Equation 86 at the end of each chunk for the next
chunk. This allows for generating all the elements for the entire chunk in parallel, before starting the computation for
this chunk. Furthermore, to update the memory modules based on Equation 88, we take the gradient with respect to the
last state of the previous chunk. Again, this allows for computing all the gradients for the next chunk in parallel. In more
details, given this chunk-wise updating procedure, the update rule for the self-referential Titans is computed as:
𝒚𝑡 =M memory,𝐶×⌈ 𝑡
𝐶⌉(𝒒𝑡),𝒌 𝑡 =M 𝒌,𝐶×⌈ 𝑡
𝐶⌉(𝒙𝑡),𝒗 𝑡 =M 𝒗,𝐶×⌈ 𝑡
𝐶⌉(𝒙𝑡), 𝜂 𝑡 =M𝜂,𝐶×⌈ 𝑡
𝐶⌉(𝒙𝑡), 𝛼 𝑡 =M𝛼,𝐶×⌈ 𝑡
𝐶⌉(𝒙𝑡),
ˆ𝒗□,𝑡 =M □,𝐶×⌈ 𝑡
𝐶⌉(𝒗𝑡),(Generating its own values for each memory)
M□,𝑡 =M □,𝑡−1
 𝛼𝑡𝑰−𝜂 𝑡𝒌𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡
−𝜂𝑡∇LM□,𝐶×⌈ 𝑡
𝐶⌉

M□,𝐶×⌈ 𝑡
𝐶⌉;𝒌𝑡, ˆ𝒗□,𝑡

,□∈{𝒌,𝒗,𝒒,𝜂,𝛼,memory}.(90)
Here, the architecture of the memories are arbitrary and even we are not forced to use the same architecture for all
components. We use a 2-layer MLP block as the architecture of all the memories:
M□(·)=(·)+𝑊 □,1𝜎(𝑊 □,2(·)).(91)
Since all the gradients as well as new keys, values, learning-rates, and weight decays can be computed in parallel before
starting the processing of the current chunk, the above updates accepts the fast parallelizable dual form that is discussed
by Sun et al. (2024) and Behrouz et al. (2025c). To better illustrate the above update rule for self-referential Titans, let us
derive the recurrent formula for the simplest case of matrix-valued memory. We derive the recurrent form for two different
objectives:
• Dot-product similarityL(M ;𝒌,𝒗)=−⟨M𝒌,𝒗⟩ : Given this objective and linear memory, the gradient is calculated
as𝒗𝒌⊤, which results in update rule of:
M□,𝑡 =M □,𝑡−1
 𝛼𝑡𝑰−𝜂 𝑡𝒌𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡
−𝜂𝑡 ˆ𝒗□,𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡 ,□∈{𝒌,𝒗,𝒒,𝜂,𝛼,memory}(92)
32
=== PAGE 33 ===
Figure 6: Class-incremental learning in the text classification domain on (Left) CLINC dataset (Larson et al. 2019), (Middle)
Banking dataset (Casanueva et al. 2020), and (Right) DBpedia dataset (Auer et al. 2007).Hope-enhanced architecture
achieves the best accuracy among other continual learning methods, including ICL.
•𝐿 2-regression loss: Given this objective and linear memory, the gradient is calculated as(M𝒌−𝒗)𝒌 ⊤, which results
in update rule of:
M□,𝑡 =M □,𝑡−1
 𝛼𝑡𝑰−𝜂 𝑡𝒌𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡
−𝜂𝑡

M□,𝐶×⌈ 𝑡
𝐶⌉𝒌𝑡− ˆ𝒗□,𝑡

𝒌⊤
𝑡 ,□∈{𝒌,𝒗,𝒒,𝜂,𝛼,memory}.(93)
8.3 Hope Neural Learning Module
In the previous sections, we first discussed Continuum Memory System (CMS) that allows for more persistent storage of
memories and defines memory as a spectrum of blocks with different frequencies of update. Due to the larger capacity
and constraints for scaling the parameters, often CMS requires simple learning rule but higher capacity to store more
persistent knowledge. On the other hand, in the previous section, we discussed the design of a self-modifying Titans, where
it can generate its own keys and so learning update to better adapt to the context. Contrary to CMS, the self-modifying
Titans has a small capacity but is using a complex and expressive learning rule. Accordingly, these two systems seem to be
complementary and their combination can enhance the model expressiveness from different aspects.
To this end, we presentHopearchitecture: A neural learning module that incorporates self-modifying Titans followed by
Continuum Memory System. TheHopedesign is illustrated in Figure 5. Formally, let 𝒙𝑡∈R 𝑑 for𝑡= 1,...,𝐿 be the input,
theHopeforward pass is defined as (we remove the normalization and convolution layers for the sake of clarity):
𝒐𝑡 =M memory,𝑡−1(𝒒𝑡),𝒌 𝑡 =M 𝒌,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡),𝒗 𝑡 =M 𝒗,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡), 𝜂 𝑡 =M𝜂,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡), 𝛼 𝑡 =M𝛼,𝑡−1(𝒙𝑡),(94)
ˆ𝒗□,𝑡 =M □,𝑡−1(𝒗𝑡), (95)
M□,𝑡 =M □,𝑡−1
 𝛼𝑡𝑰−𝜂 𝑡𝒌𝑡𝒌⊤
𝑡
−𝜂𝑡∇LM□,𝑡−1
 M□,𝑡−1 ;𝒌𝑡, ˆ𝒗□,𝑡
,□∈{𝒌,𝒗,𝒒,𝜂,𝛼,memory}.(96)
𝒚𝑡 =MLP(𝑓𝑘)(MLP(𝑓𝑘−1)(···MLP (𝑓 1)(𝒐𝑡))),(97)
where the block’s output for token𝑡 is𝒚𝑡. In our experiments, we also normalize𝒒 and𝒌 with𝐿2 normalization and also
use local convolutions with window size of 4.
Hope-Attention.We also use another variant ofHope, in which we simply replace the self-modifying Titans with softmax
global attention (Vaswani et al. 2017).
9 Experiments
In this section, we empirically evaluate the performance of different components we discussed throughout the paper. More
specifically, (1) we first focus on the presented optimization algorithms and compare them with state-of-the-art methods; (2)
We then focus on in-context and continual learning tasks and show how the nested learning paradigm and more specifically
higher order in-context learning enhances the capabilities of models. We compare the continuum memory system with
simple MLP layers and discuss how a pre-trained model can be adapted to be a continual learner; (3) We then focus on
the language modeling and long context understanding ofHopemodel and compare it with Transformers and modern
recurrent architectures. The details of the experiments and their setups are explained in the corresponding sections.
33
=== PAGE 34 ===
Figure 7: The effect of memory levels on the in-context learning performance of the model in (Left) MK-NIAH of
RULER (Hsieh et al. 2024), (Middle) LongHealth (Adams et al. 2025), (Right) QASPER (Dasigi et al. 2021) benchmarks. Note
that for QASPER benchmark (Right), the lower values indicate better performance.
9.1Hope: Continual Learning and Long Context Understanding
One of the main goals of NL is to enhance the continual learning capabilities, and so in this section, we evaluate NL and
its implications such as Continuum Memory System (CMS) andHopeon multiple continual learning and long context
understanding tasks. For each of the tasks, we use the best reported results on the benchmark as the baselines.
Class Incremental Learning.First, we focus on class-incremental learning tasks on three datasets:
• CLINC (Larson et al. 2019): CLINC is a multi-domain intent classification benchmark designed for task-oriented
dialog systems, with a special focus on detecting out-of-scope (OOS) queries. It has 150 in-scope intent classes
spanning 10 broad domains (e.g. Banking, Travel, Home, Weather, Small Talk, etc.) with 23.7K total queries, of which
22.5K are in-scope and 1.2K are out-of-scope.
• Banking (Casanueva et al. 2020): Banking dataset is a single-domain intent classification benchmark focused on
fine-grained customer service queries in the banking domain. In this dataset, each example is a short customer query
(e.g. “How can I reset my card PIN?”) that must be classified into the correct banking intent/category. There are 3083
total examples labeled with the 77 intents (heavily imbalanced classes).
• DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007): DBpedia is a text classification benchmark from Wikipedia where article abstracts are
expected to be categorized into ontology topic classes. In other words, given a short Wikipedia description, the goal
is to predict its high-level topic/category (such as whether the article is about a book, a film, an animal, a place, etc.).
The dataset has over 340K examples labeled across those 70 second-level classes, but we sample 10K training and 1K
test instances for the 70-class DBpedia task.
As the backbone of ourHopemodels we use Llama3-8B and Llama-3B (Dubey et al. 2024), and then employ our technique
discussed in Section 7.3 to make the MLP blocks capable of adaption, placing them in different levels with different
frequency updates followed by continual pre-training with 15B tokens. Following Momeni et al. (2025), we use simple
in-context learning (ICL) capability of Llama-3 models (with the same process of continual pre-training with 15B tokens
but without any change in the MLP blocks), Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017), and In-context
Continual Learning with an External Learner (InCA) (Momeni et al. 2025) as the baselines of our evaluation. The results
are reported in Figure 6.Hopeshows the best performance across all continual learning baselines, including models
with external learner (i.e., InCA). ComparingHopewith ICL, the main difference comes fromHope’s multiple levels of
in-context learning (or equivalently, different frequency of updates for MLP blocks), indicating the effectiveness of CMS’s
design for enhancing continual learning capabilities. Furthermore, the superior performance ofHope, compared to InCA
and EWC, indicates that the knowledge transfer between levels plays a critical role in the performance of the model.
The Effect of Levels on In-context Learning.Despite showing improvement when using CMS in the above tasks, to
better understand and evaluate the effect of levels and their frequency on the in-context level ability of the model, we
perform in-context question/answering and multi-key long context understanding. More specifically, we use:
• LongHealth (Adams et al. 2025): This is a benchmark for long-context clinical question answering with multiple-
choice QA tasks based on extensive fictional patient records, testing an LLM’s ability to extract and reason over
detailed medical documents. The dataset includes 20 comprehensive patient case documents (across various diseases),
34
=== PAGE 35 ===
Table 1: Needle-In-A-Haystack experiments with: (1) Single needle with
three levels of difficulty: single-needle tasks—S-NIAH-1 (passkey retrieval),
S-NIAH-2 (numerical needle), and S-NIAH-3 (UUID-based needle); (2)
multi-query; (3) multi-key; and (4) multi-value settings of the benchmark.
S-NIAH-1 S-NIAH-2 S-NIAH-3
(pass-key retrieval) (number in haystack) (uuid in haystack)
Model4K 8K 16K 4K 8K 16K 4K 8K 16K
Transformer 88.6 76.4 79.8 100 98.8 94.2 78.0 69.2 40.8
Hope-Attention 100 100 100 100 98.4 94.4 76.8 68.8 42.4
RWKV-7 100 100 99.6 93.8 44.8 12.6 63.8 13.2 5.8
Comba 100 100 99.4 92.6 47.2 13.4 62.4 13.8 7.4
DLA 96.4 71.2 44.0 79.6 42.6 28.2 18.2 8.8 4.0
Titans 100 100 100 99.6 84.6 75.4 74.2 42.8 21.2
Hope 100 100 100 99.2 88.4 78.2 73.2 46.2 24.8
MK-NIAH-1 MQ-NIAH MV-NIAH
(multi-key line retrieval) (multi-query) (multi-value)
Model4K 8K 16K 4K 8K 16K 4K 8K 16K
Transformer 79.4 83.0 61.4 58.9 48.0 29.8 37.5 34.1 21.5
Hope-Attention 80.2 84.8 60.8 60.4 47.8 30.6 35.2 34.4 24.8
RWKV-7 21.4 18.8 9.6 20.4 14.8 8.6 16.2 13.4 6.8
Comba 21.4 19.4 8.2 21.8 15.2 6.4 16.5 13.5 7.2
DLA 27.4 20.0 11.8 26.4 22.0 6.4 25.6 12.8 9.6
Titans 26.4 23.6 8.2 22.8 19.8 9.4 24.6 15.1 8.2
Hope 29.4 24.8 14.8 31.7 24.8 14.2 31.4 17.2 11.4
Figure 8: Continual Translation of a Novel
Language (CTNL) task. Red points are the
results with only one language. Blue points
are the results in the continual leanring setup.
Figure 9: BABILong Benchmark. Red points
are the results of fine-tuned models, and Blue
points are the large models’ zero-shot results.
each about 5.1K–6.8K words in length, and we use 200 questions sampled from patient records.
• QASPER (Dasigi et al. 2021): This benchmark is an information-seeking QA dataset centered on full-length NLP
research papers. In particular, it contains around 5K QA pairs grounded in around 1.6L NLP research papers. Also,
we use the full text of each paper as the context for the model.
• MK-NIAH (Hsieh et al. 2024): We use the task of multiple keys in needle-in-haystack from RULER (Hsieh et al. 2024).
This setup requires models to not only locate but also extract multiple pieces of information distributed throughout
a long text.
As for the baseline, we use ICL, which is the same asHopewith 1-level of memory, and also DuoAttention (Xiao et al.
2025). It is notable that methods such as Cartridges (Eyuboglu et al. 2025) have shown promising performance, even better
than DuoAttention and sometimes ICL. Here, however, we exclude their comparison withHopemainly due to the fact that
Hopehas higher memory usage and there are fundamental differences in their computational costs (e.g., self-studying,
etc.), requiring further experiments with careful and controlled design in the future studies. For the variants of our model,
we use different number of memory levels with different frequencies, which are grouped based on the lowest frequency.
Note that the lowest-frequency memory corresponds to the most persistent memory of the model and so we expect models
with higher lowest frequency to be more adaptive.
The results are reported in Figure 7.Hopewith any number of levels and also with any lowest frequency outperforms
both ICL baseline as well as the efficient DuoAttention. Furthermore, comparing theHope’s variants with themselves,
the results suggest that: (1) The more levels of memory can help with in-context learning capability of the model and
enhances its long-term memory and so long-context understanding; and (2) The higher the lowest-frequency the lower
the performance. As discussed above, the lowest-frequency memory is the most persistent memory of the model and so
35
=== PAGE 36 ===
increasing it means that the model has a weaker but more adaptive long-term memory. Due to the fact that the frequency
of update directly affects the efficiency of the model, one might find “Lowest Frequency = 2K” an optimal setup as it offers
significantly more efficient forward pass, while achieves close performance with “Lowest Frequency = 512”.
Learning a New Language In-Context.Throughout the paper, we argued that pre-training can be seen as an in-context
learning process, where the context is the entire pre-training data. Accordingly, when we use more levels in the neural
learning module, or performing in-context learning on different context flows, we expect the model to show better
adaptability and continual learning capabilities. To this end, with combining two existing benchmarks of MTOB (Tanzer
et al. 2024) and Manchu (Pei et al. 2025), we design a new continual learning task that the LLM learns two new languages
in context and is expected to translate phrases to English. Then for our Continual Translation of a Novel Language (CTNL)
task, we consider two setups: (1) Learning and testing the performance of the model on each language separately (in red
color). This is a baseline we use to measure the catastrophic forgetting when comparing with the next setting; and (2) The
model, first, learns these two languages in a sequential manner (in blue color) and then is asked to translate the phrases to
English. We use ICL as the baseline, and to study the importance of multi-level design ofHope, we use different variants of
Hopewith 1, 2, and 3 additional levels of memory, which we refer to asHope-1,Hope-2, andHope-3, respectively.
The results are reported in Table 8. More specifically, each point is the performance of one model in one of the setups such
that the𝒙-axis (resp.𝒚-axis) indicates the model ChRF in translation of Manchu→ English (resp. Kalamang→ English). In
the first setup (in-context translation without continual learning), allHope’s variants performs better or on-par compared
to ICL, supporting the importance of CMS design. In the second setup (i.e., continual translation), however, ICL faces
dramatic performance drop and almost rely on its capabilities achieved in its pre-training (i.e., catastrophic forgetting about
the knowledge in the context). On the other hand, increasing the memory levels in theHopeshows clear improvement and
Hope-3 almost recovers the ICL capability in the first setup, without continual learning. These results further support the
importance of CMS design in continual learning and the ability of the model to adapt itself to the new tasks.
9.2Hope: Long Context Understanding
In the previous section, we evaluated the performance ofHope-Attention, when the MLP blocks are adapted to perform
in-context learning. In this part, we evaluate the performance ofHopein long context understanding, when it starts
learning from scratch. To this end, we use about 50B tokens from a mixture of FineWeb-Edu (Penedo et al. 2024) and
long-context documents with a vocabulary size of 32K to train all the models from scratch. All models are optimized using
AdamW with tuned learning rate for each model and with the default optimizer configuration in Behrouz et al. (2025c). We
focus on two popular benchmarks of RULER (Hsieh et al. 2024) and BABILong (Kuratov et al. 2024):
Needle-in-a-Haystack (NIAH) Tasks.In the first part, we focus on the needle-in-a-haystack with different setups of:
(1) single needle but different types (i.e., pass-key, number, and uuid), (2) multi-key, (3) multi-query, and (4) multi-value,
all follows Hsieh et al. (2024). As for the baselines, we use RetNet (Sun et al. 2023) and DeltaNet (Schlag et al. 2021) as
the representative of the modelspurelybased on Hebbian- and Delta-rule, and experimented with diverse set of modern
linearrecurrent models and so used the linear models with the best performance: i.e., RWKV-7 (Peng et al. 2025a) and
Comba (Hu et al. 2025). As another group of baselines, we also compare withdeepmemory modules with dot-product and
𝐿2 regression objectives: i.e., DLA (Behrouz et al. 2025a), and Titans (Behrouz et al. 2025c).
The results are reported in Table 1. Comparing with other attention-free models,Hopeachieves the best performance
across all tasks and levels of difficulties. Particularly, comparing to linear memories, deep memory modules show better
performance in longer sequences, mainly due to their higher memory capacity to compress more tokens. ComparingHope
with Titans, the superior performance ofHope, specifically in longer context length supports the importance of both
self-referential update as well as the CMS design. Finally, we also evaluate the performance ofHope-Attention and compare
it with Transformers to better understand the contribution of CMS design. The results indicate thatHope-Attention
achieves a better performance compared to Transformers, supporting the advantage of having CMS inHope-Attention
design.
BABILong.Next, we evaluate theHope’s performance on BABILong benchmark (Kuratov et al. 2024) and compare it with
(1) large models such as GPT4 and GPT4o-mini (Achiam et al. 2023); (2) middle-size Llama-8B model (Dubey et al. 2024)
with its RAG augmented version; and (3) the state-of-the-art small models in this tasks: i.e., RMT (Bulatov et al. 2022),
ARMT (Rodkin et al. 2024), and Titans (Behrouz et al. 2025c). We follow the original setup of the benchmark and fine-tune
36
=== PAGE 37 ===
Table 2: Performance of models on language modeling and common-sense reasoning tasks.
Model Wiki. LMB. LMB. PIQA Hella. Wino. ARC-e ARC-c SIQA BoolQ Avg.
ppl↓ppl↓ acc↑acc↑acc_n↑acc↑acc↑acc_n↑acc↑acc↑ ↑
760M params / 30B tokens
Transformer++ 24.18 24.27 37.1 67.2 43.8 53.0 65.6 33.4 39.1 61.7 50.11
Samba∗ 21.07 22.85 39.2 68.9 47.8 53.1 65.8 34.9 38.9 63.1 51.46
RetNet 25.77 24.19 34.5 66.8 41.2 51.9 63.6 32.5 38.8 56.2 48.19
DeltaNet 24.52 24.38 36.8 67.3 44.5 51.8 64.2 32.7 39.6 60.1 49.63
RWKV-7 23.75 23.08 37.1 67.3 47.6 52.2 64.7 34.2 39.4 61.9 50.55
Comba 22.41 22.19 37.5 66.9 48.2 52.4 65.1 34.1 40.1 62.8 50.89
TTT 24.17 23.51 34.7 67.3 43.9 51.0 64.5 33.8 40.2 59.6 47.32
Miras (Memora) 22.28 22.31 38.2 67.8 49.3 53.3 63.6 36.1 40.9 63.0 51.53
DLA 23.12 22.09 36.1 68.0 47.9 52.7 65.8 34.6 39.1 59.6 50.48
Titans 20.08 21.52 38.1 69.1 48.5 52.7 66.2 35.7 40.3 62.8 51.68
Hope 18.68 20.07 38.8 69.2 49.1 53.6 66.8 36.1 41.2 63.4 52.28
1.3B params / 100B tokens
Transformer++ 17.92 17.73 42.6 71.4 52.3 54.1 69.9 36.5 41.8 58.4 53.38
Samba∗ 16.15 13.21 45.2 71.5 53.8 55.8 69.1 36.7 40.6 63.0 54.46
RetNet 18.91 17.04 41.2 71.3 49.1 55.2 67.5 34.1 41.4 61.0 52.60
DeltaNet 18.62 17.10 41.6 70.1 49.4 52.7 67.6 35.2 39.7 54.8 51.39
RWKV-7 18.44 15.96 46.7 72.4 54.9 57.5 71.6 38.2 40.7 60.4 55.30
Comba 18.16 14.87 46.9 73.1 54.5 57.7 72.0 39.1 40.2 60.6 55.39
TTT 18.42 14.51 46.8 72.9 55.2 59.0 71.8 39.5 39.8 59.6 55.58
Miras (Memora) 15.90 12.04 48.7 73.1 56.0 57.4 71.5 37.9 40.2 61.3 55.76
DLA 16.31 12.29 44.5 70.6 53.9 54.2 69.6 36.0 40.8 60.2 53.72
Titans 15.60 11.41 49.1 73.1 56.3 59.8 72.4 40.8 42.1 61.0 56.82
Hope 14.39 10.08 51.0 73.9 57.5 61.2 73.8 42.7 42.8 61.4 58.04
∗ is a hybrid of attention + linear RNN (Ren et al. 2024).
the small models with the same process as Kuratov et al. (2024).
The results are reported in Table 9. Large models show significant performance drop with increasing the sequence length,
where all fail around 128K-256K context length. The RAG augmented model also show a drop with increasing the context,
but it is able to relatively maintain its performance after 256K context length. Among fine-tuned models, Titans, ARMT,
andHopeshow competitive results until 1M context length, but the performance of both Titans and ARMT drop fast after
that point.Hopemaintains its good performance even for 10M context length, mainly due to its CMS design. It is notable
that the performance of all small models, includingHope, can drop significantly when used without fine-tuning. The
reason is, compressing large context (e.g., 10M), in addition to a powerful memory management in the high-frequency level,
requires enough capacity to compress 10M tokens or at least tokens that are needed for the final answer. The fine-tuning
step helps the models to adjust their lower-frequency levels to adapt fast and so properly manage their memory in the
higher-frequency levels.
9.3Hope: Language Modeling and Common-Sense Reasoning
In this section, we aim to studyHopeas a backbone of a language model and evaluate it on common language modeling
and common-sense reasoning tasks with the setup of:
• Datasets: We evaluateHopeand baselines on Wikitext (Merity et al. 2017), LMB (Paperno et al. 2016), PIQA (Bisk et al.
2020), HellaSwag (Zellers et al. 2019), WinoGrande (Sakaguchi et al. 2021), ARC-easy (ARC-e) and ARC-challenge
(ARC-c) (Clark et al. 2018), SIQA (Sap et al. 2019), and BoolQ (Clark et al. 2019) benchmarks.
• Baselines: As for the baselines, similar to Section 9.2, we use RetNet (Sun et al. 2023) and DeltaNet (Schlag et al. 2021)
as the representatives of the models that arepurelybased on Hebbian- or Delta-rule, and two modernmatrix-valued
recurrent models with the best performance compared to others: i.e., RWKV-7 (Peng et al. 2025a) and Comba (Hu
et al. 2025). As another group of baselines, we compare with attention-freedeepmemory modules with diverse
37
=== PAGE 38 ===
Table 5: Accuracies of various models on the formal language recognition tasks.
Non-Star-Free Regular Counter
Parallel Parity(𝑎𝑎) ∗ (𝑎𝑏𝑎𝑏)∗ 𝑎𝑛𝑏𝑛 𝑎𝑛𝑏𝑛𝑐𝑛 Shuffle-2
Model Training Bin0 Bin1 Bin0 Bin1 Bin0 Bin1 Bin0 Bin1 Bin0 Bin1 Bin0 Bin1
LSTM✗100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
Transformer✓46.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
Linear✓78.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
DeltaNet✓98.2 10.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
SRWM✗100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
Hope ✓ 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
internal attentional bias of dot-product,𝐿2, and𝐿𝑝 regression: i.e., TTT (Sun et al. 2024), Miras (Behrouz et al. 2025b),
DLA (Behrouz et al. 2025a) and Titans (Behrouz et al. 2025c). Finally, we also compare with Transformers (Vaswani
et al. 2017; Dubey et al. 2024) as well as the hybrid of attention and linear RNN, Samba (Ren et al. 2024).
• Training: We train models with about 760M and 1.3B parameters, trained with 30B and 100B tokens, respectively,
from a mixture of FineWeb-Edu (Penedo et al. 2024) and long-context documents with a vocabulary size of 32K to
train all the models from scratch. All models are optimized using AdamW with tuned learning rate for each model
and with the default optimizer configuration in Behrouz et al. (2025c).
The results are reported in Table 2.Hopeoutperforms all the baselines on the average performance in both language
modeling and common-sense reasoning benchmarks. Interestingly, with scaling the parameters,Hopeshow higher
performance gain compare to other attention-free models.
9.4Hope: In-context Recall Tasks and MAD Synthetic Benchmark
In-context recall is often referred to as one of the challenging benchmarks for attention-free models. In this section,
we follow Arora et al. (2024) and perform experiments on SWDE (Lockard et al. 2019), NQ (Kwiatkowski et al. 2019),
DROP (Dua et al. 2019), FDA (Arora et al. 2023), SQUAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), and TQA (Kembhavi et al. 2017) to evaluate
the effectiveness ofHope’s design. We use the same set of baselines and experimental setup as the above previous section.
The results are reported in Table 3. Transformers achieve the best performance, whileHopeshow competitive results,
outperforming all the attention-free baselines and closing the gap with Transformers.
Table 3: The performance ofHopeand baselines in short
in-context recall tasks.Hopeoutperforms all attention-free
models and close the gap with Transformers.
SWDE NQ DROP FDA SQUAD TQA
Transformers 71.4 22.0 23.9 67.3 39.4 59.1
RWKV-7 52.3 17.8 21.7 32.8 28.5 56.2
Comba 53.9 19.1 21.9 35.5 30.2 56.4
Titans 60.8 20.3 22.0 37.6 31.8 57.5
Hope 65.9 21.2 22.8 41.9 33.0 57.7
Table 4: Performance ofHopeand baselines on the synthetic
benchmark of MAD (Poli et al. 2024).Hopeoutperforms all the
baselines, including Transformers.
Compress. ICR Fuzzy ICR Selective MemoryCopying
Transformers 49.4 100 47.9 96.2 83.7
RWKV-7 45.1 100 32.8 95.6 82.2
Comba 46.3 100 32.8 96.4 82.9
Titans 49.8 100 50.0 99.4 83.4
Hope 51.2 100 52.1 99.7 85.2
We also study the performance ofHopeon MAD benchmark (Poli et al. 2024), which is a synthetic benchmark, evaluating
the performance of models in recall, memorization, compression, and copying tasks. The results are reported in Table 4.
Hopeachieves the best results compared to baselines.
9.5 Language Recognition Tasks
One of the critical limitations of Transformers is on non-parallelizable tasks, where the recurrence plays a significant rule
in achieving proper performance. An example of such tasks is state tracking problem, where the model needs to track its
38
=== PAGE 39 ===
Table 6: Ablation Study onHope. All components ofHopeare positively
contributing to its performance.
Model Language Modeling Reasoning
ppl↓acc↑
Hope 12.24 58.1
w/o DGD 13.41 56.5
w/o Momentum 13.58 56.9
w/o weight decay 13.71 57.2
w/o CMS 13.04 57.3
w/o inner-projection𝒌13.77 56.9
w/o inner-projection𝒗13.90 55.1
w/o inner-projection𝒒12.19 57.4
Figure 10: The effect of context usage on the
perplexity of the model. We expect the per-
plexity of a model with powerful memory
management to decrease with more context.
Figure 11: ViT test and train loss on ImageNet-21K (Ridnik et al. 2021),
trained with AdamW, Muon, and our M3 optimizers.
Figure 12: Training time of models with
140M and 1.3B parameters with Muon,
AdaMuon, and M3 optimizers.
state given a sequence of instructions (movement, etc.), and several studies have shown that Transformers both in theory
and practice significantly underperforms models with non-linear recurrence (Merrill et al. 2024; Grazzi et al. 2025). In this
section, we focus on formal language recognition tasks and follow the construction of the benchmark by Irie et al. (2023).
The results are reported in Table 5.Hopeachieves the perfect score on all the tasks, similar to other non-linear recurrent
models; e.g., LSTM Schmidhuber et al. 1997 and SRWM (Irie et al. 2022b). The main advantage ofHope, however, is the fact
that when it is needed, it has parallelizable training and so can scale to larger scales for language modeling tasks.
9.6Hope: Ablation Studies and Scaling
In this section, we first study the importance of design choices we have made for theHopearchitecture by performing
ablation studies, where we remove or change one of theHope’s components at a time. Note that, in the previous experiments,
we have evaluated the significance of some components: E.g., Table 8 and Figure 7 have already been shown the effect of
number of levels as well as the frequency of update on the performance ofHopein continual learning. In this section, to
compare different variants, we use the average perplexity of models in language modeling as well as the average accuracy
in common-sense reasoning tasks. The results are reported in Table 6. (1) The first row, replaces Delta Gradient Descent
with a simple gradient descent in the design of self-modifying Titans; (2) The second row removes the momentum term in
the self-modifying Titans; (3) removes the weight decay; (4) removes the CMS fromHope’s architecture; (5, 6, 7) transfer the
projections for𝒌,𝒗,𝒒 from higher-frequency level to the lowest-frequency level. All the components ofHopecontribute to
its superior performance in these tasks and removing or changing each of them can damage the model’s perplexity in
language modeling and/or accuracy in common-sense reasoning tasks.
9.7 Expressive Optimizers
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our M3 optimizer from both aspects of effectiveness in finding the solution
and also efficiency of training in large scales:
39
=== PAGE 40 ===
ImageNet.In this experiment, we focus on ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) architecture for vision tasks and pre-train it on
ImageNet-21K, which consists of 11M images corresponding to 10,450 classes. We use a patch size of 16, MLP dimension of
1536 and 3072 for the two scales of 24M and 86M models, respectively. We control all other components and finetuned
hyperparameters for each optimizer separately to make sure a fair comparison. We vary the optimizer for training the ViT
to understand which of the optimizers find more effective solutions in the same number of training steps. The training and
test loss of trained models with different optimizers are reported in Figure 11. Our M3 shows the best training/test loss
compared to both AdamW and Muon.
Efficiency in Large Models.Due to the small size of the model that is needed for ImageNet, we also perform an
efficiency comparison when training a language model. To this end, we use two scales of 140M and 1.3B and train the same
Transformer model using different optimizers of Muon (Jordan et al. 2024), AdaMuon (Si et al. 2025), and our M3. The
results are reported in Figure 12. Our M3 optimizer, due to the use of multiple momentums (memories) is reletively slower
compare to the Muon optimizer, and show on par efficiency with AdaMuon.
10 Conclusion
In this paper, we introducedNested Learning (NL)a new learning paradigm, in which modern machine learning systems
are modeled as inter-connected, multi-level optimization problems, each with its own context flow and update frequency.
Within this view, both architectures and optimizers are instances of nested systems of associative memories that compress
their own context (either is tokens, gradients, or higher-level signals) into internal parameters. This perspective reframes
pre-training, in-context learning, and continual learning as manifestations of the same underlying mechanism: learning to
compress and reuse context at different levels and time scales. This perspective recasts backpropagation, momentum, and
preconditioning as associative memory mechanisms, and explains a wide family of existing methods as specific design
points in a larger (previously hidden) space.
Building on NL’s viewpoint, we derived generalized gradient-based updates: e.g., Delta Gradient Descent, Delta Momentum,
Multi-scale Momentum Muon (M3), and reinterpreted modern sequence architectures nested associative memories. To
enhance the memory processing, we introduced Continuum Memory System (CMS), a new formulation for memory
that generalizes the traditional viewpoint of “long-term/short-term memory blocks”. OurHopearchitecture based on a
self-modifying Titans and CMS improves continual learning and long-context reasoning capabilitites, while remaining
competitive as a general backbone.
Is Catastrophic Forgetting Solved?WhileHopeand CMS have shown promising results in reducing catastrophic
forgetting in the tasks we empirically studied, the undesirable phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting is not “solved” in
general. From nested learning viewpoint on learning and backpropagation process, catastrophic forgetting is a natural
consequence of compression, where the limited capacity of the network forces the model to forget so that it retains capacity
for new information. We view NL as a roadmap rather than a destination: it suggests that progress on continual learning,
long-context reasoning, modern optimizers, and self-modifying models will come from better exploiting the extra design
axis oflevelsrather than from ever-deeper static networks.
40
=== PAGE 41 ===
References
[1] Walter Pitts. “The linear theory of neuron networks: The dynamic problem”. In:The bulletin of mathematical
biophysics5 (1943), pp. 23–31.
[2] Warren S McCulloch and Walter Pitts. “The statistical organization of nervous activity”. In:Biometrics4.2 (1948),
pp. 91–99.
[3] Warren S McCulloch. “The brain computing machine”. In:Electrical Engineering68.6 (1949), pp. 492–497.
[4] William Beecher Scoville and Brenda Milner. “Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions”. In:
Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry20.1 (1957), p. 11.
[5] Arthur L Samuel. “Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers”. In:IBM Journal of research and
development3.3 (1959), pp. 210–229.
[6] Seppo Linnainmaa. “The representation of the cumulative rounding error of an algorithm as a Taylor expansion of
the local rounding errors”. PhD thesis. Master’s Thesis (in Finnish), Univ. Helsinki, 1970.
[7] Kunihiko Fukushima. “Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network model for a mechanism of pattern recogni-
tion unaffected by shift in position”. In:Biological cybernetics36.4 (1980), pp. 193–202.
[8] Erkki Oja. “Simplified neuron model as a principal component analyzer”. In:Journal of mathematical biology15.3
(1982), pp. 267–273.
[9] David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. “Learning representations by back-propagating
errors”. In:nature323.6088 (1986), pp. 533–536.
[10] Geoffrey E Hinton and David C Plaut. “Using fast weights to deblur old memories”. In:Proceedings of the ninth
annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society. 1987, pp. 177–186.
[11] DL Prados and SC Kak. “Neural network capacity using delta rule”. In:Electronics Letters25.3 (1989), pp. 197–199.
[12] Juergen Schmidhuber. “Learning to control fast-weight memories: An alternative to recurrent nets. Accepted for
publication in”. In:Neural Computation(1992).
[13] Tim VP Bliss and Graham L Collingridge. “A synaptic model of memory: long-term potentiation in the hippocampus”.
In:Nature361.6407 (1993), pp. 31–39.
[14] Jürgen Schmidhuber. “A ‘self-referential’weight matrix”. In:International conference on artificial neural networks.
Springer. 1993, pp. 446–450.
[15] Juergen Schmidhuber, Jieyu Zhao, and Marco Wiering.Simple principles of metalearning. 1996.
[16] Uwe Frey and Richard GM Morris. “Synaptic tagging and long-term potentiation”. In:Nature385.6616 (1997),
pp. 533–536.
[17] Juergen Schmidhuber and Sepp Hochreiter. “Long Short-term Memory”. In:Neural Computation MIT-Press(1997).
[18] Amos Storkey. “Increasing the capacity of a hopfield network without sacrificing functionality”. In:International
Conference on Artificial Neural Networks. Springer. 1997, pp. 451–456.
[19] Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al.Reinforcement learning: An introduction. Vol. 1. 1. 1998.
[20] Jonathan H. Connell and Sridhar Mahadevan. “Robot Learning”. In:Robotica17.2 (1999), pp. 229–235.doi: 10.1017/
S0263574799271172.
[21] Sean PA Drummond, Gregory G Brown, J Christian Gillin, John L Stricker, Eric C Wong, and Richard B Buxton.
“Altered brain response to verbal learning following sleep deprivation”. In:Nature403.6770 (2000), pp. 655–657.
[22] Hideyuki Okano, Tomoo Hirano, and Evan Balaban. “Learning and memory”. In:Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences97.23 (2000), pp. 12403–12404.
[23] Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Gödel machines: self-referential universal problem solvers making provably optimal self-
improvements”. In:arXiv preprint cs/0309048(2003).
[24] Gyorgy Buzsaki and Andreas Draguhn. “Neuronal oscillations in cortical networks”. In:science304.5679 (2004),
pp. 1926–1929.
[25] Donald Olding Hebb.The organization of behavior: A neuropsychological theory. Psychology press, 2005.
[26] Alvaro Pascual-Leone, Amir Amedi, Felipe Fregni, and Lotfi B Merabet. “The plastic human brain cortex”. In:Annu.
Rev. Neurosci.28.1 (2005), pp. 377–401.
[27] David J Foster and Matthew A Wilson. “Reverse replay of behavioural sequences in hippocampal place cells during
the awake state”. In:Nature440.7084 (2006), pp. 680–683.
[28] Lisa Marshall, Halla Helgadóttir, Matthias Mölle, and Jan Born. “Boosting slow oscillations during sleep potentiates
memory”. In:Nature444.7119 (2006), pp. 610–613.doi:10.1038/nature05278.
[29] Sören Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak, and Zachary Ives. “Dbpedia: A
nucleus for a web of open data”. In:international semantic web conference. Springer. 2007, pp. 722–735.
41
=== PAGE 42 ===
[30] Timothy J. Buschman and Earl K. Miller. “Top-down versus bottom-up control of attention in the prefrontal and
posterior parietal cortices”. In:Science315.5820 (2007), pp. 1860–1862.doi:10.1126/science.1138071.
[31] Daoyun Ji and Matthew A Wilson. “Coordinated memory replay in the visual cortex and hippocampus during
sleep”. In:Nature neuroscience10.1 (2007), pp. 100–107.
[32] Seung-Schik Yoo, Peter T Hu, Ninad Gujar, Ferenc A Jolesz, and Matthew P Walker. “A deficit in the ability to form
new human memories without sleep”. In:Nature neuroscience10.3 (2007), pp. 385–392.
[33] Nicholas J Higham.Functions of matrices: theory and computation. SIAM, 2008.
[34] Michael V Johnston. “Plasticity in the developing brain: implications for rehabilitation”. In:Developmental disabilities
research reviews15.2 (2009), pp. 94–101.
[35] Adrien Peyrache, Mehdi Khamassi, Karim Benchenane, Sidney I Wiener, and Francesco P Battaglia. “Replay of
rule-learning related neural patterns in the prefrontal cortex during sleep”. In:Nature neuroscience12.7 (2009),
pp. 919–926.
[36] Susanne Diekelmann and Jan Born. “The memory function of sleep”. In:Nature Reviews Neuroscience11.2 (2010),
pp. 114–126.doi:10.1038/nrn2762.
[37] John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. “Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and stochastic
optimization.” In:Journal of machine learning research12.7 (2011).
[38] Juergen Fell and Nikolai Axmacher. “The role of phase synchronization in memory processes”. In:Nature reviews
neuroscience12.2 (2011), pp. 105–118.
[39] Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. “Neural networks for machine learning lecture 6a overview
of mini-batch gradient descent”. In:Cited on14.8 (2012), p. 2.
[40] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural
networks”. In:Advances in neural information processing systems25 (2012).
[41] Hong-Viet V. Ngo, Thomas Martinetz, Jan Born, and Matthias Mölle. “Auditory closed-loop stimulation of the sleep
slow oscillation enhances memory”. In:Neuron78.3 (2013), pp. 545–553.doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.03.006.
[42] Dzmitry Bahdanau. “Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate”. In:arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473(2014).
[43] James F Cavanagh and Michael J Frank. “Frontal theta as a mechanism for cognitive control”. In:Trends in cognitive
sciences18.8 (2014), pp. 414–421.
[44] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980
(2014).
[45] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes.” In:ICLR. Ed. by Yoshua Bengio and
Yann LeCun. 2014.url:http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/iclr/iclr2014.html#KingmaW13.
[46] Guido Montúfar, Razvan Pascanu, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. “On the number of linear regions of deep
neural networks”. In:Advances in neural information processing systems27 (2014).
[47] Pascal Fries. “Rhythms for cognition: communication through coherence”. In:Neuron88.1 (2015), pp. 220–235.
[48] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Deep learning”. In:nature521.7553 (2015), pp. 436–444.
[49] Bernhard P. Staresina, Til Ole Bergmann, Mathilde Bonnefond, Roemer van der Meij, Ole Jensen, Lorena Deuker,
Christian E. Elger, Nikolai Axmacher, and Jürgen Fell. “Hierarchical nesting of slow oscillations, spindles and
ripples in the human hippocampus during sleep”. In:Nature Neuroscience18.11 (2015), pp. 1679–1686.doi: 10.
1038/nn.4119.
[50] Jimmy Ba, Geoffrey E Hinton, Volodymyr Mnih, Joel Z Leibo, and Catalin Ionescu. “Using fast weights to attend to
the recent past”. In:Advances in neural information processing systems29 (2016).
[51] Timothy Dozat. “Incorporating nesterov momentum into adam”. In: (2016).
[52] Andrew C. Heusser, David Poeppel, Youssef Ezzyat, and Lila Davachi. “Episodic sequence memory is supported by
a theta–gamma phase code”. In:Nature Neuroscience19.10 (2016), pp. 1374–1380.doi:10.1038/nn.4374.
[53] Mikael Lundqvist, Pawel Herman, Scott L. Brincat, Timothy J. Buschman, and Earl K. Miller. “Gamma and beta
bursts underlie working memory”. In:Neuron90.1 (2016), pp. 152–164.doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2016.02.028.
[54] Denis Paperno, German Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Ngoc Quan Pham, Raffaella Bernardi, Sandro Pezzelle,
Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel Fernandez. “The LAMBADA dataset: Word prediction requiring a broad
discourse context”. In:Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers). Ed. by Katrin Erk and Noah A. Smith. Berlin, Germany: Association for Computational Linguistics,
Aug. 2016, pp. 1525–1534.doi:10.18653/v1/P16-1144.url:https://aclanthology.org/P16-1144/.
[55] Ben Poole, Subhaneil Lahiri, Maithra Raghu, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Surya Ganguli. “Exponential expressivity
in deep neural networks through transient chaos”. In:Advances in neural information processing systems29 (2016).
42
=== PAGE 43 ===
[56] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. “Squad: 100,000+ questions for machine
comprehension of text”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05250(2016).
[57] Sashank J Reddi, Ahmed Hefny, Suvrit Sra, Barnabas Poczos, and Alex Smola. “Stochastic variance reduction for
nonconvex optimization”. In:International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2016, pp. 314–323.
[58] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche, Julian Schrit-
twieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. “Mastering the game of Go with deep
neural networks and tree search”. In:nature529.7587 (2016), pp. 484–489.
[59] Thomas B Christophel, P Christiaan Klink, Bernhard Spitzer, Pieter R Roelfsema, and John-Dylan Haynes. “The
distributed nature of working memory”. In:Trends in cognitive sciences21.2 (2017), pp. 111–124.
[60] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. “Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks”.
In:International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2017, pp. 1126–1135.
[61] Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad, Md Mostofa
Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. “Deep learning scaling is predictable, empirically”. In:arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.00409(2017).
[62] Aniruddha Kembhavi, Minjoon Seo, Dustin Schwenk, Jonghyun Choi, Ali Farhadi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
“Are you smarter than a sixth grader? textbook question answering for multimodal machine comprehension”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern recognition. 2017, pp. 4999–5007.
[63] James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu, Kieran
Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
neural networks”. In:Proceedings of the national academy of sciences114.13 (2017), pp. 3521–3526.
[64] Takashi Kitamura, Sachie K Ogawa, Dheeraj S Roy, Teruhiro Okuyama, Mark D Morrissey, Lillian M Smith, Roger L
Redondo, and Susumu Tonegawa. “Engrams and circuits crucial for systems consolidation of a memory”. In:Science
356.6333 (2017), pp. 73–78.
[65] Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. “Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models”. In:
International Conference on Learning Representations. 2017.url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=Byj72udxe.
[66] W Scott Terry.Learning and memory: Basic principles, processes, and procedures. Routledge, 2017.
[67] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,
and Illia Polosukhin. “Attention is All you Need”. In:Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed.
by I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett. Vol. 30. Cur-
ran Associates, Inc., 2017.url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/
3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
[68] Jeremy Bernstein, Yu-Xiang Wang, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and Animashree Anandkumar. “signSGD: Compressed
optimisation for non-convex problems”. In:International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2018, pp. 560–569.
[69] Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind Tafjord.
“Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457
(2018).
[70] Jianqing Fan.Local polynomial modelling and its applications: monographs on statistics and applied probability 66.
Routledge, 2018.
[71] Vineet Gupta, Tomer Koren, and Yoram Singer. “Shampoo: Preconditioned stochastic tensor optimization”. In:
International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2018, pp. 1842–1850.
[72] David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot,
Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. “A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters
chess, shogi, and Go through self-play”. In:Science362.6419 (2018), pp. 1140–1144.
[73] Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina Toutanova.
“BoolQ: Exploring the Surprising Difficulty of Natural Yes/No Questions”. In:Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Ed. by Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio. Minneapolis, Minnesota:
Association for Computational Linguistics, June 2019, pp. 2924–2936.doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1300.url: https:
//aclanthology.org/N19-1300/.
[74] Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. “DROP: A reading
comprehension benchmark requiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.00161(2019).
[75] R Devon Hjelm, Alex Fedorov, Samuel Lavoie-Marchildon, Karan Grewal, Phil Bachman, Adam Trischler, and Yoshua
Bengio. “Learning deep representations by mutual information estimation and maximization”. In:International
Conference on Learning Representations. 2019.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bklr3j0cKX.
43
=== PAGE 44 ===
[76] Jens G Klinzing, Niels Niethard, and Jan Born. “Mechanisms of systems memory consolidation during sleep”. In:
Nature neuroscience22.10 (2019), pp. 1598–1610.
[77] Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti, Danielle
Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. “Natural questions: a benchmark for question answering
research”. In:Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics7 (2019), pp. 453–466.
[78] Stefan Larson, Anish Mahendran, Joseph J Peper, Christopher Clarke, Andrew Lee, Parker Hill, Jonathan K
Kummerfeld, Kevin Leach, Michael A Laurenzano, Lingjia Tang, et al. “An Evaluation Dataset for Intent Classification
and Out-of-Scope Prediction”. In:Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). 2019, pp. 1311–
1316.
[79] Colin Lockard, Prashant Shiralkar, and Xin Luna Dong. “Openceres: When open information extraction meets the
semi-structured web”. In:Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). 2019, pp. 3047–3056.
[80] Tsendsuren Munkhdalai, Alessandro Sordoni, Tong Wang, and Adam Trischler. “Metalearned neural memory”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems32 (2019).
[81] Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. “Social IQa: Commonsense Reasoning
about Social Interactions”. In:Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Ed. by Kentaro Inui,
Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan. Hong Kong, China: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2019,
pp. 4463–4473.doi:10.18653/v1/D19-1454.url:https://aclanthology.org/D19-1454/.
[82] Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. “HellaSwag: Can a Machine Really Finish
Your Sentence?” In:Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Ed. by
Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluis Marquez. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics, July
2019, pp. 4791–4800.doi:10.18653/v1/P19-1472.url:https://aclanthology.org/P19-1472/.
[83] Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin Choi, et al. “Piqa: Reasoning about physical commonsense in
natural language”. In:Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. Vol. 34. 2020, pp. 7432–7439.
[84] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan,
Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. “Language models are few-shot learners”. In:Advances in neural
information processing systems33 (2020), pp. 1877–1901.
[85] Inigo Casanueva, Tadas Temcinas, Daniela Gerz, Matthew Henderson, and Ivan Vulic. “Efficient Intent Detection
with Dual Sentence Encoders”. In:ACL 2020(2020), p. 38.
[86] Mehrdad Farajtabar, Navid Azizan, Alex Mott, and Ang Li. “Orthogonal gradient descent for continual learning”.
In:International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics. PMLR. 2020, pp. 3762–3773.
[87] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville,
and Yoshua Bengio. “Generative adversarial networks”. In:Communications of the ACM63.11 (2020), pp. 139–144.
[88] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec
Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. “Scaling laws for neural language models”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361
(2020).
[89] Angelos Katharopoulos, Apoorv Vyas, Nikolaos Pappas, and François Fleuret. “Transformers are rnns: Fast au-
toregressive transformers with linear attention”. In:International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2020,
pp. 5156–5165.
[90] Liyuan Liu, Haoming Jiang, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Jiawei Han. “On the
Variance of the Adaptive Learning Rate and Beyond”. In:International Conference on Learning Representations. 2020.
url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=rkgz2aEKDr.
[91] Noam Shazeer. “Glu variants improve transformer”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05202(2020).
[92] Pradeep Dasigi, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Arman Cohan, Noah A Smith, and Matt Gardner. “A dataset of information-
seeking questions and answers anchored in research papers”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03011(2021).
[93] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner,
Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. “An Image
is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale”. In:International Conference on Learning
Representations. 2021.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy.
[94] Akihiro Goto, Ayaka Bota, Ken Miya, Jingbo Wang, Suzune Tsukamoto, Xinzhi Jiang, Daichi Hirai, Masanori
Murayama, Tomoki Matsuda, Thomas J. McHugh, Takeharu Nagai, and Yasunori Hayashi. “Stepwise synaptic
plasticity events drive the early phase of memory consolidation”. In:Science374.6569 (2021), pp. 857–863.doi:
44
=== PAGE 45 ===
10.1126/science.abj9195 . eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.abj9195 .url:
https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.abj9195.
[95] Kazuki Irie, Imanol Schlag, Robert Csordas, and Juergen Schmidhuber. “Going beyond linear transformers with
recurrent fast weight programmers”. In:Advances in neural information processing systems34 (2021), pp. 7703–7717.
[96] John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger, Kathryn Tunyasu-
vunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with
AlphaFold”. In:nature596.7873 (2021), pp. 583–589.
[97] Tal Ridnik, Emanuel Ben-Baruch, Asaf Noy, and Lihi Zelnik-Manor. “ImageNet-21K Pretraining for the Masses”. In:
Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1). 2021.
url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=Zkj_VcZ6ol.
[98] Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. “Winogrande: An adversarial winograd
schema challenge at scale”. In:Communications of the ACM64.9 (2021), pp. 99–106.
[99] Imanol Schlag, Kazuki Irie, and Juergen Schmidhuber. “Linear transformers are secretly fast weight programmers”.
In:International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2021, pp. 9355–9366.
[100] Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. “What learning algorithm is
in-context learning? investigations with linear models”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661(2022).
[101] Aydar Bulatov, Yury Kuratov, and Mikhail Burtsev. “Recurrent memory transformer”. In:Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems35 (2022), pp. 11079–11091.
[102] Yanda Chen, Ruiqi Zhong, Sheng Zha, George Karypis, and He He. “Meta-learning via Language Model In-context
Tuning”. In:Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers). 2022, pp. 719–730.
[103] Alexandre Défossez, Leon Bottou, Francis Bach, and Nicolas Usunier. “A Simple Convergence Proof of Adam and
Adagrad”. In:Transactions on Machine Learning Research(2022).issn: 2835-8856.url: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=ZPQhzTSWA7.
[104] Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Diego
de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. “Training compute-optimal large language
models”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556(2022).
[105] Kazuki Irie, Francesco Faccio, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Neural differential equations for learning to program
neural nets through continuous learning rules”. In:Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems35 (2022),
pp. 38614–38628.
[106] Kazuki Irie, Imanol Schlag, Róbert Csordás, and Juergen Schmidhuber. “A modern self-referential weight matrix
that learns to modify itself”. In:International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2022, pp. 9660–9677.
[107] William Merrill, Ashish Sabharwal, and Noah A Smith. “Saturated transformers are constant-depth threshold
circuits”. In:Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics10 (2022), pp. 843–856.
[108] Dheeraj S Roy, Young-Gyun Park, Minyoung E Kim, Ying Zhang, Sachie K Ogawa, Nicholas DiNapoli, Xinyi Gu,
Jae H Cho, Heejin Choi, Lee Kamentsky, et al. “Brain-wide mapping reveals that engrams for a single memory are
distributed across multiple brain regions”. In:Nature communications13.1 (2022), p. 1799.
[109] Yufeng Zhang, Boyi Liu, Qi Cai, Lingxiao Wang, and Zhaoran Wang. “An analysis of attention via the lens of
exchangeability and latent variable models”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14852(2022).
[110] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo
Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. “Gpt-4 technical report”. In:arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08774(2023).
[111] Simran Arora, Brandon Yang, Sabri Eyuboglu, Avanika Narayan, Andrew Hojel, Immanuel Trummer, and Christo-
pher Ré. “Language models enable simple systems for generating structured views of heterogeneous data lakes”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09433(2023).
[112] Xiangning Chen, Chen Liang, Da Huang, Esteban Real, Kaiyuan Wang, Hieu Pham, Xuanyi Dong, Thang Luong,
Cho-Jui Hsieh, Yifeng Lu, et al. “Symbolic discovery of optimization algorithms”. In:Advances in neural information
processing systems36 (2023), pp. 49205–49233.
[113] Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Makram Chahine, Alexander Amini, and Daniela Rus. “Liquid
Structural State-Space Models”. In:The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations. 2023.url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=g4OTKRKfS7R.
[114] Kazuki Irie, Robert Csordas, and Juergen Schmidhuber. “Practical computational power of linear transformers and
their recurrent and self-referential extensions”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16076(2023).
45
=== PAGE 46 ===
[115] Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong.
“CodeGen: An Open Large Language Model for Code with Multi-Turn Program Synthesis”. In:The Eleventh Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations. 2023.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=iaYcJKpY2B_.
[116] Bo Peng, Eric Alcaide, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Alon Albalak, Samuel Arcadinho, Stella Biderman, Huanqi Cao,
Xin Cheng, Michael Nguyen Chung, Leon Derczynski, Xingjian Du, Matteo Grella, Kranthi Kiran GV, Xuzheng He,
Haowen Hou, Przemyslaw Kazienko, Jan Kocon, Jiaming Kong, Bartłomiej Koptyra, Hayden Lau, Jiaju Lin, Krishna
Sri Ipsit Mantri, Ferdinand Mom, Atsushi Saito, Guangyu Song, Xiangru Tang, Johan S. Wind, Stanisław Wozniak,
Zhenyuan Zhang, Qinghua Zhou, Jian Zhu, and Rui-Jie Zhu. “RWKV: Reinventing RNNs for the Transformer Era”.
In:The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 2023.url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=7SaXczaBpG.
[117] Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Eric Nguyen, Daniel Y Fu, Tri Dao, Stephen Baccus, Yoshua Bengio, Stefano Ermon,
and Christopher Ré. “Hyena hierarchy: Towards larger convolutional language models”. In:International Conference
on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2023, pp. 28043–28078.
[118] Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. “Are emergent abilities of large language models a mirage?”
In:Advances in neural information processing systems36 (2023), pp. 55565–55581.
[119] Aaditya Singh, Stephanie Chan, Ted Moskovitz, Erin Grant, Andrew Saxe, and Felix Hill. “The transient nature
of emergent in-context learning in transformers”. In:Advances in neural information processing systems36 (2023),
pp. 27801–27819.
[120] Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Shuming Ma, Yuqing Xia, Jilong Xue, Jianyong Wang, and Furu Wei. “Retentive
network: A successor to transformer for large language models”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08621(2023).
[121] Johannes Von Oswald, Maximilian Schlegel, Alexander Meulemans, Seijin Kobayashi, Eyvind Niklasson, Nicolas
Zucchet, Nino Scherrer, Nolan Miller, Mark Sandler, Max Vladymyrov, et al. “Uncovering mesa-optimization
algorithms in transformers”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05858(2023).
[122] Wenhai Wang, Zhe Chen, Xiaokang Chen, Jiannan Wu, Xizhou Zhu, Gang Zeng, Ping Luo, Tong Lu, Jie Zhou, Yu
Qiao, et al. “Visionllm: Large language model is also an open-ended decoder for vision-centric tasks”. In:Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems36 (2023), pp. 61501–61513.
[123] Ekin Akyürek, Mehul Damani, Adam Zweiger, Linlu Qiu, Han Guo, Jyothish Pari, Yoon Kim, and Jacob Andreas.
“The Surprising Effectiveness of Test-Time Training for Few-Shot Learning”. In:Forty-second International Conference
on Machine Learning. 2024.
[124] Ekin Akyürek, Bailin Wang, Yoon Kim, and Jacob Andreas. “In-context language learning: Architectures and
algorithms”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12973(2024).
[125] Simran Arora, Sabri Eyuboglu, Michael Zhang, Aman Timalsina, Silas Alberti, James Zou, Atri Rudra, and Christo-
pher Re. “Simple linear attention language models balance the recall-throughput tradeoff”. In:Forty-first International
Conference on Machine Learning. 2024.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=e93ffDcpH3.
[126] Maximilian Beck, Korbinian Pöppel, Markus Spanring, Andreas Auer, Oleksandra Prudnikova, Michael Kopp,
Günter Klambauer, Johannes Brandstetter, and Sepp Hochreiter. “xLSTM: Extended Long Short-Term Memory”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04517(2024).
[127] Aleksandar Botev, Soham De, Samuel L Smith, Anushan Fernando, George-Cristian Muraru, Ruba Haroun, Leonard
Berrada, Razvan Pascanu, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Robert Dadashi, et al. “RecurrentGemma: Moving Past Transformers
for Efficient Open Language Models”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07839(2024).
[128] Jonathan Daume, Jan Kamiński, Andrea G. P. Schjetnan, Yousef Salimpour, Umais Khan, Michael Kyzar, Chrystal M.
Reed, William S. Anderson, Taufik A. Valiante, Adam N. Mamelak, and Ueli Rutishauser. “Control of working
memory by phase–amplitude coupling of human hippocampal neurons”. In:Nature629 (2024), pp. 393–401.doi:
10.1038/s41586-024-07309-z.
[129] Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil
Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. “The llama 3 herd of models”. In:arXiv e-prints(2024),
arXiv–2407.
[130] Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Simeng Sun, Samuel Kriman, Shantanu Acharya, Dima Rekesh, Fei Jia, and Boris Ginsburg.
“RULER: What’s the Real Context Size of Your Long-Context Language Models?” In:First Conference on Language
Modeling. 2024.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=kIoBbc76Sy.
[131] K Jordan, Y Jin, V Boza, Y Jiacheng, F Cecista, L Newhouse, and J Bernstein. “Muon: An optimizer for hidden layers
in neural networks, 2024b”. In:URL https://kellerjordan. github. io/posts/muon(2024).
[132] Praneeth Kacham, Vahab Mirrokni, and Peilin Zhong. “PolySketchFormer: Fast Transformers via Sketching Polyno-
mial Kernels”. In:Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
46
=== PAGE 47 ===
Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp. Vol. 235.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, July 2024, pp. 22748–22770.url: https://proceedings.mlr.
press/v235/kacham24a.html.
[133] Yuri Kuratov, Aydar Bulatov, Petr Anokhin, Ivan Rodkin, Dmitry Igorevich Sorokin, Artyom Sorokin, and Mikhail
Burtsev. “BABILong: Testing the Limits of LLMs with Long Context Reasoning-in-a-Haystack”. In:The Thirty-
eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track. 2024.url: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=u7m2CG84BQ.
[134] Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu
Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. “Deepseek-v3 technical report”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437(2024).
[135] Bo Liu, Rui Wang, Lemeng Wu, Yihao Feng, Peter Stone, and Qiang Liu. “Longhorn: State space models are amortized
online learners”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14207(2024).
[136] William Merrill, Jackson Petty, and Ashish Sabharwal. “The Illusion of State in State-Space Models”. In:Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning. 2024.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=QZgo9JZpLq.
[137] Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíček, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin A Raffel, Leandro Von Werra, Thomas
Wolf, et al. “The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text data at scale”. In:Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems37 (2024), pp. 30811–30849.
[138] Bo Peng, Daniel Goldstein, Quentin Anthony, Alon Albalak, Eric Alcaide, Stella Biderman, Eugene Cheah, Xingjian
Du, Teddy Ferdinan, Haowen Hou, et al. “Eagle and finch: Rwkv with matrix-valued states and dynamic recurrence”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05892(2024).
[139] Michael Poli, Armin W Thomas, Eric Nguyen, Pragaash Ponnusamy, Björn Deiseroth, Kristian Kersting, Taiji Suzuki,
Brian Hie, Stefano Ermon, Christopher Ré, et al. “Mechanistic design and scaling of hybrid architectures”. In:arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.17844(2024).
[140] Liliang Ren, Yang Liu, Yadong Lu, Yelong Shen, Chen Liang, and Weizhu Chen. “Samba: Simple Hybrid State Space
Models for Efficient Unlimited Context Language Modeling”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07522(2024).
[141] Ivan Rodkin, Yuri Kuratov, Aydar Bulatov, and Mikhail Burtsev. “Associative recurrent memory transformer”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04841(2024).
[142] Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. “Transformers, parallel computation, and logarithmic depth”.
In:Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning. 2024.url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
QCZabhKQhB.
[143] Yu Sun, Xinhao Li, Karan Dalal, Jiarui Xu, Arjun Vikram, Genghan Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xinlei Chen, Xiaolong
Wang, Sanmi Koyejo, et al. “Learning to (learn at test time): Rnns with expressive hidden states”. In:arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.04620(2024).
[144] Garrett Tanzer, Mirac Suzgun, Eline Visser, Dan Jurafsky, and Luke Melas-Kyriazi. “A Benchmark for Learning
to Translate a New Language from One Grammar Book”. In:The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations. 2024.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=tbVWug9f2h.
[145] Wannan Yang, Chen Sun, Roman Huszár, Thomas Hainmueller, Kirill Kiselev, and György Buzsáki. “Selection of
experience for memory by hippocampal sharp wave ripples”. In:Science383.6690 (2024), pp. 1478–1483.
[146] Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L Bartlett. “Trained transformers learn linear models in-context”. In:Journal
of Machine Learning Research25.49 (2024), pp. 1–55.
[147] Yushun Zhang, Congliang Chen, Tian Ding, Ziniu Li, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhiquan Luo. “Why transformers need adam:
A hessian perspective”. In:Advances in neural information processing systems37 (2024), pp. 131786–131823.
[148] Lisa Adams, Felix Busch, Tianyu Han, Jean-Baptiste Excoffier, Matthieu Ortala, Alexander Löser, Hugo JWL Aerts,
Jakob Nikolas Kather, Daniel Truhn, and Keno Bressem. “Longhealth: A question answering benchmark with long
clinical documents”. In:Journal of Healthcare Informatics Research(2025), pp. 1–17.
[149] Zeyuan Allen-Zhu. “Physics of Language Models: Part 4.1, Architecture Design and the Magic of Canon Layers”. In:
SSRN Electronic Journal(May 2025).https://ssrn.com/abstract=5240330.
[150] Shaden Alshammari, John Hershey, Axel Feldmann, William T Freeman, and Mark Hamilton. “I-Con: A Unifying
Framework for Representation Learning”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16929(2025).
[151] Ali Behrouz, Zeman Li, Praneeth Kacham, Majid Daliri, Yuan Deng, Peilin Zhong, Meisam Razaviyayn, and Vahab
Mirrokni. “Atlas: Learning to optimally memorize the context at test time”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23735
(2025).
[152] Ali Behrouz, Meisam Razaviyayn, Peilin Zhong, and Vahab Mirrokni. “It’s All Connected: A Journey Through
Test-Time Memorization, Attentional Bias, Retention, and Online Optimization”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13173
(2025).
47
=== PAGE 48 ===
[153] Ali Behrouz, Peilin Zhong, and Vahab Mirrokni. “Titans: Learning to Memorize at Test Time”. In:The Thirty-ninth
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2025.url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
8GjSf9Rh7Z.
[154] Franz Louis Cesista.Heuristic Solutions for Steepest Descent on the Stiefel manifold. July 2025.url: %5Curl%7Bhttps:
//leloykun.github.io/ponder/steepest-descent-stiefel%7D.
[155] Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel
Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. “Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning,
multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261(2025).
[156] Francesco Pappone Devan Selvaraj.Multiscale Muon. https://publish.obsidian.md/ueaj/Machine+Learning/
Research+Ideas/Multiscale+Muon. Blogpost. Aug. 2025.
[157] Benoit Dherin, Michael Munn, Hanna Mazzawi, Michael Wunder, and Javier Gonzalvo. “Learning without training:
The implicit dynamics of in-context learning”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.16003(2025).
[158] Sabri Eyuboglu, Ryan Ehrlich, Simran Arora, Neel Guha, Dylan Zinsley, Emily Liu, Will Tennien, Atri Rudra,
James Zou, Azalia Mirhoseini, et al. “Cartridges: Lightweight and general-purpose long context representations via
self-study”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06266(2025).
[159] Samuel J Gershman, Ila Fiete, and Kazuki Irie. “Key-value memory in the brain”. In:Neuron113.11 (2025), pp. 1694–
1707.
[160] Riccardo Grazzi, Julien Siems, Jörg K.H. Franke, Arber Zela, Frank Hutter, and Massimiliano Pontil. “Unlocking
State-Tracking in Linear RNNs Through Negative Eigenvalues”. In:The Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations. 2025.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=UvTo3tVBk2.
[161] Jiaxi Hu, Yongqi Pan, Jusen Du, Disen Lan, Xiaqiang Tang, Qingsong Wen, Yuxuan Liang, and Weigao Sun.
“Improving Bilinear RNN with Closed-loop Control”. In:The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems. 2025.
[162] Kazuki Irie, Róbert Csordás, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Metalearning Continual Learning Algorithms”. In:Trans-
actions on Machine Learning Research(2025).issn: 2835-8856.url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
IaUh7CSD3k.
[163] Kazuki Irie and Samuel J Gershman. “Fast weight programming and linear transformers: from machine learning to
neurobiology”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.08435(2025).
[164] Ben Keigwin, Dhruv Pai, and Nathan Chen.Gram-Space Manifold Muon. Oct. 2025.url: %5Curl%7Bhttps:
//blog.tilderesearch.com/vignettes/gram-space%7D.
[165] Aonian Li, Bangwei Gong, Bo Yang, Boji Shan, Chang Liu, Cheng Zhu, Chunhao Zhang, Congchao Guo, Da Chen,
Dong Li, et al. “Minimax-01: Scaling foundation models with lightning attention”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.08313
(2025).
[166] Saleh Momeni, Sahisnu Mazumder, Zixuan Ke, and Bing Liu. “In-context continual learning assisted by an external
continual learner”. In:Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics. 2025, pp. 7292–
7306.
[167] Matteo Pagliardini, Pierre Ablin, and David Grangier. “The AdEMAMix Optimizer: Better, Faster, Older”. In:The
Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations. 2025.url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
jj7b3p5kLY.
[168] Renhao Pei, Yihong Liu, Peiqin Lin, François Yvon, and Hinrich Schütze. “Understanding In-Context Machine
Translation for Low-Resource Languages: A Case Study on Manchu”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11862(2025).
[169] Bo Peng, Ruichong Zhang, Daniel Goldstein, Eric Alcaide, Haowen Hou, Janna Lu, William Merrill, Guangyu Song,
Kaifeng Tan, Saiteja Utpala, et al. “RWKV-7" Goose" with Expressive Dynamic State Evolution”. In:arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.14456(2025).
[170] Bo Peng, Ruichong Zhang, Daniel Goldstein, Eric Alcaide, Haowen Hou, Janna Lu, William Merrill, Guangyu Song,
Kaifeng Tan, Saiteja Utpala, et al. “Rwkv-7" goose" with expressive dynamic state evolution”. In:arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.14456(2025).
[171] Yuxiao Qu, Matthew Y. R. Yang, Amrith Setlur, Lewis Tunstall, Edward Emanuel Beeching, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
Aviral Kumar. “Optimizing Test-Time Compute via Meta Reinforcement Finetuning”. In:Forty-second International
Conference on Machine Learning. 2025.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=TqODUDsU4u.
[172] Chongjie Si, Debing Zhang, and Wei Shen. “Adamuon: Adaptive muon optimizer”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.11005
(2025).
48
=== PAGE 49 ===
[173] Julien Siems, Timur Carstensen, Arber Zela, Frank Hutter, Massimiliano Pontil, and Riccardo Grazzi. “DeltaProduct:
Improving State-Tracking in Linear RNNs via Householder Products”. In:The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems. 2025.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=SoRiaijTGr.
[174] David Silver and Richard S Sutton. “Welcome to the era of experience”. In:Google AI1 (2025).
[175] Richard S. Sutton.The OaK Architecture: A Vision of SuperIntelligence from Experience. Keynote at the Reinforcement
Learning Conference (RLC). Accessed: 2025-12-02. Aug. 2025.url:https://rlj.cs.umass.edu/rlc-2025.
[176] Nikhil Vyas, Depen Morwani, Rosie Zhao, Itai Shapira, David Brandfonbrener, Lucas Janson, and Sham M. Kakade.
“SOAP: Improving and Stabilizing Shampoo using Adam for Language Modeling”. In:The Thirteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations. 2025.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=IDxZhXrpNf.
[177] Ke Alexander Wang, Jiaxin Shi, and Emily B Fox. “Test-time regression: a unifying framework for designing
sequence models with associative memory”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12352(2025).
[178] Guangxuan Xiao, Jiaming Tang, Jingwei Zuo, junxian guo, Shang Yang, Haotian Tang, Yao Fu, and Song Han. “DuoAt-
tention: Efficient Long-Context LLM Inference with Retrieval and Streaming Heads”. In:The Thirteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations. 2025.url:https://openreview.net/forum?id=cFu7ze7xUm.
[179] hongzhou yu, Tianhao Cheng, Yingwen Wang, Wen He, Qing Wang, Ying Cheng, Yuejie Zhang, Rui Feng, and
Xiaobo Zhang. “FineMedLM-o1: Enhancing Medical Knowledge Reasoning Ability of LLM from Supervised Fine-
Tuning to Test-Time Training”. In:Second Conference on Language Modeling. 2025.url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=7ZwuGZCopw.
[180] Yifan Zhang, Zhen Qin, and Quanquan Gu. “Higher-order Linear Attention”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.27258
(2025).
49
=== PAGE 50 ===
A Generalized Formulation for Nested Learning and Nested Systems
In this section, we discuss the generalized version of nested systems andNSAM, we discussed in Section 3:
Definition 6((Generalized) Nested System).A (ordered) nested system is a system with 𝐾 (ordered) levels such that each
level1 ≤𝑘≤𝐾 consists of a set of optimization problems {(L(𝑘)
𝑖 ,C(𝑘)
𝑖 ,𝚯(𝑘)
𝑖 )}𝑁𝑘
𝑖=1, whereL𝑖(·;·) is the optimization objective
in the𝑖-th problem,C𝑖 is its context (the data that is optimized on), 𝚯𝑖 is the set of its parameters, and each optimization
problem is optimized using gradient descent, or equivalently:
𝜽𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡+1 =arg min
𝚽(𝑘)
𝑖
L(𝑘)
𝑖 (𝚽(𝑘)
𝑖 ;𝑥𝑡+1)+ 1
2𝜂𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡+1
∥𝚽(𝑘)
𝑖 −𝜽𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡 ∥2
2 where𝑥 𝑡+1 ∼C (𝑘)
𝑖 ,and𝚽 𝑖(𝑘)∈𝚯(𝑘)
𝑖 .(98)
Definition 7((Generalized) Nested System of Associative Memories).A nested system of associative memory ( NSAM) is a
system with𝐾 (ordered) levels such that each level1 ≤𝑘≤𝐾 consists of a set of optimization problems{(L(𝑘)
𝑖 ,C(𝑘)
𝑖 ,𝚯(𝑘)
𝑖 )}𝑁𝑘
𝑖=1,
whereC𝑖 ={(𝒌 (𝑖)
𝑗 ,𝒗(𝑖)
𝑗 )}𝐿𝑖
𝑗=1 is a set of ground-truth mappings,L𝑖(·;·,·) is the optimization objective that measures the quality
of memory learned mappings in the 𝑖-th problem, 𝚯𝑖 is the set of memory parameters, and each optimization problem is
optimized using gradient descent:
𝜽𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡+1 =arg min
𝚽(𝑘)
𝑖
L(𝑘)
𝑖 (𝚽(𝑘)
𝑖 ;𝒌(𝑖)
𝑡+1,𝒗(𝑖)
𝑡+1)+ 1
2𝜂𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡+1
∥𝚽(𝑘)
𝑖 −𝜽𝑖
(𝑘)
𝑡 ∥2
2 where(𝒌 (𝑖)
𝑡+1,𝒗(𝑖)
𝑡+1)∼C (𝑘)
𝑖 ,and𝚽 𝑖(𝑘)∈𝚯(𝑘)
𝑖 .(99)
B Adam, AdaGrad, and Other Similar Optimizers as Associative Memory
Modules
Revisiting the momentum term without using the chain rule in backpropagation,
𝑊ℓ𝑡+1 =𝑊ℓ𝑡+𝒎 ℓ𝑡+1
𝒎ℓ𝑡+1 =𝛼 ℓ,𝑡+1𝒎ℓ𝑡−𝜂ℓ,𝑡+1∇𝑊ℓ𝑡L  𝑊ℓ𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1
,(100)
one can interpret the momentum as a key or value-less associative memory (Behrouz et al. 2025b, see Section 5), where the
gradient terms∇𝑊ℓ𝑡L  𝑊ℓ𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1
 are compressed into the momentum. We expect from a powerful momentum term to
perfectly memorize all the past gradients in the training process so it can better model the current update to the weights.
To this end, one can start from defining a simple objective as:
˜L𝑡 =
𝑡∑︁
𝑖=1
∥𝒎ℓ𝑡⊙𝒈ℓ𝑖+1−𝑷ℓ𝑡∥2
2 +𝜆 ℓ∥𝒎ℓ𝑡∥2
𝐹,(101)
where𝒈ℓ𝑡+1 =−∇𝑊ℓ𝑡L  𝑊ℓ𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1
. This objective aims to find a momentum term that does not simply map the gradients
to 1 (which also results in limited memory management in momentum), but it maps gradients to a global property of
past data samples. The more expressive this global property is, the more accurately the momentum can incorporate the
compressed information from past. Accordingly, the objective in Equation 101 admits an optimal associative memory that
maps gradients to𝑷 ℓ𝑡+1 as:
𝒎(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖
∗
=

𝑯(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝜆 ℓ𝑰
−1
⊙

𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖

=

𝑯(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝜆 ℓ𝑰
−1
⊙ ˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1⊙𝑷 ℓ𝑡,where
𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1 =𝑴 (𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝛽 1𝒈ℓ𝑖+1⊙𝑷 ℓ𝑡 = ˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1⊙𝑷 ℓ𝑡,
˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1 =𝑴 (𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝛽 1𝒈ℓ𝑖+1,
𝑯(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1 =𝑯 (𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝛽 2𝒈ℓ𝑖+1⊙𝒈ℓ𝑖+1 =𝑯 (𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝛽 2𝒈ℓ 2
𝑖+1.(102)
Given this solution, one can write the update step as:
𝑊ℓ𝑖+1 =𝑊ℓ𝑖−𝜂𝑡𝒎(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖
∗
=𝑊ℓ𝑖−𝜂𝑖

𝑯(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝜆 ℓ𝑰
−1
⊙ ˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1⊙𝑷 ℓ𝑡.(103)
50
=== PAGE 51 ===
We start with a simple case, where𝑷ℓ𝑡 is the summation of the square of past gradients: i.e., 𝑷ℓ𝑡 = ˝𝑡
𝑖=1𝒈2
ℓ𝑖+1 . With the
choice of𝜆→0, Equation 103 recovers simple gradient descent with momentum. That is, let𝜆=0, we have:
𝑊ℓ𝑖+1 =𝑊ℓ𝑖−𝜂𝑡𝒎(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖
∗
=𝑊ℓ𝑖−𝜂𝑖

𝑯(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖
−1
⊙ ˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1⊙𝑷 ℓ𝑡
|{z}
𝑯(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖/𝛽2
=𝑊ℓ𝑖−𝜂𝑡𝛽2 ˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1,(104)
which based on the definition of ˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1, this update rule is equivalent to gradient descent with momentum. Next, we
explore a more sophisticated design choice, where we use𝑷ℓ𝑡 as the variance of data samples before token𝑡+ 1. In this
case, formally,𝑷ℓ𝑡 =
√︃˝𝑡
𝑖=1𝒈2
ℓ𝑖+1 and so the update rule is as follows:
𝑊ℓ𝑖+1 =𝑊ℓ𝑖−𝜂𝑡𝒎(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖
∗
=𝑊ℓ𝑖−𝜂𝑖

𝑯(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝜆 ℓ𝑰
−1
⊙ ˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1⊙𝑷 ℓ𝑡
|{z}
𝑯(𝑡)
1
2
ℓ,𝑖 /
√
𝛽2
≈𝑊ℓ𝑖− 𝜂𝑡
√︁
𝛽2
˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖
𝑯(𝑡) 1/2
ℓ,𝑖 +𝜀
(105)
which is equivalent to the popular Adam optimizer (Kingma et al. 2014a). Therefore, Adam is an optimal associative
memory given the𝐿2 regression objective that is defined in Equation 101. In fact, the update component of Adam at each
state aims to learn a mapping between the gradients and their variance (as a global property of past data samples). One
interesting point about this formulation is about the frequency of elements. Looking at the first and second momentum in
Adam optimizer, the frequency of update for both of these memories are the same as both are updated after each sample.
Furthermore, the computation of each of them can be done in parallel and so are independent. Accordingly, it is one of the
few examples that two components without any internal gradient flow, are placed in the same frequency and so level (see
Section 3.2).
Going beyond element-wise update, we reformulate Equation 101 with outer-product operation as:
˜L𝑡 =
𝑡∑︁
𝑖=1
∥𝒎ℓ𝑡𝒈ℓ𝑖+1−𝑷ℓ𝑡∥2
2 +𝜆 ℓ∥𝒎ℓ𝑡∥2
𝐹,(106)
where𝒈ℓ𝑡+1 =−∇𝑊ℓ𝑡L  𝑊ℓ𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡+1
. Similar to Equation 102, finding the optimal solution to the above objective is defined
as:
𝒎(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖
∗
=

𝑯(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝜆 ℓ𝑰
−1 
𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖

=

𝑯(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝜆 ℓ𝑰
−1
˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1𝑷ℓ𝑡,where (107)
𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1 =𝑴 (𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝛽 1𝑷ℓ𝑡 𝒈ℓ⊤
𝑖+1 =𝑷 ℓ𝑡
˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1,(108)
˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1 =𝑴 (𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝛽 1𝒈ℓ⊤
𝑖+1,(109)
𝑯(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1 =𝑯 (𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝛽 2𝒈ℓ𝑖+1𝒈ℓ⊤
𝑖+1.(110)
With a similar choice as Adam, i.e., letting𝑷ℓ𝑡 be the variance of the gradients so far,𝑷ℓ𝑡 =
√︃˝𝑡
𝑖=1𝒈ℓ𝑖+1𝒈⊤
ℓ𝑖+1 , then the above
solution can be simplified as:
𝑊ℓ𝑖+1 =𝑊ℓ𝑖−𝜂𝑡𝒎(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖
∗
=𝑊ℓ𝑖−𝜂𝑖

𝑯(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 +𝜆 ℓ𝑰
−1
𝑷ℓ𝑡
|{z}
𝑯(𝑡)
1
2
ℓ,𝑖 /
√
𝛽2
˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖+1≈𝑊ℓ𝑖− 𝜂𝑡
√︁
𝛽2
𝑯(𝑡)−1/2
ℓ,𝑖 ˜𝑴(𝑡)
ℓ,𝑖 (111)
The above formulation is the AdaGrad with momentum (Défossez et al. 2022) and so generalizes the AdaGrad (Duchi et al.
2011), i.e., when𝛽1 = 1. Similarly, based on the connection of Adam optimizer (Kingma et al. 2014a) with other algorithms
such as RMSProp (Hinton et al. 2012), SignSGD and its momentum-based variants (Bernstein et al. 2018), NAdam (Dozat
2016), AMSGrad (Reddi et al. 2016), RAdam (Liu et al. 2020), and Lion (Chen et al. 2023), as well as considering AdaGrad’s
connection with optimizers such as Shampoo (Gupta et al. 2018) and Soap (Vyas et al. 2025)–i.e., as the approximation of
the preconditioning term–we can conclude that all these optimizers can be re-formulated as associative memory that aims
to compress the gradients.
51
=== PAGE 52 ===
C Delta Gradient Descent with Normalization
In Section 4.5 we discussed that gradient descent can be see as an associative memory, and be reformulated as:
𝑊𝑡+1 =arg min
𝑊
⟨𝑊𝒙𝑡,∇𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡)⟩+ 1
2𝜂𝑡
∥𝑊−𝑊 𝑡∥2
2,(112)
where each step aims at learning the negative of the gradient direction. Due to the fact that this learning rule only use
update terms that depends on the current gradient, we definedu𝑡 =−∇ 𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡 ;𝒙𝑡), and extended the above process to
Delta Gradient Descent with more expressive objective ofL 2 regression loss:
𝑊𝑡+1 =arg min
𝑊
1
2∥𝑊𝒙𝑡−u𝑡∥2
2+ 1
2𝜂𝑡
∥𝑊−𝑊 𝑡∥2
2.(113)
We assume that𝒙𝑡 is normalized (e.g. in normalized memory systems or in neural networks with normalization layers,
∥𝒙𝑡∥2 =𝜆). Taking gradient to optimize the above objective,
2(𝑊𝑡+1𝒙𝑡−∇𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡,𝒙𝑡))𝒙⊤
𝑡 +2𝜂𝑡(𝑊𝑡+1−𝑊𝑡)=0,(114)
which results in:
𝑊𝑡+1(𝒙𝑡𝒙⊤
𝑡 +𝜂𝑡𝐼)=∇ 𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡,𝒙𝑡)𝒙⊤
𝑡 +𝜂𝑡𝑊𝑡,(115)
⇒𝑊 𝑡+1 =(∇ 𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡,𝑥𝑡)𝑥⊤
𝑡 +𝜂𝑡𝑊𝑡)(𝒙𝑡𝒙⊤
𝑡 +𝜂𝑡𝐼)−1.(116)
To compute(𝒙 𝑡𝒙⊤
𝑡 +𝜂𝑡𝐼)−1 term with Sherman-Morrison lemma, we have:
(𝑥𝑡𝑥⊤
𝑡 +𝜂𝑡𝐼)−1 = 1
𝜂𝑡
(𝐼− 1
𝜆2+𝜂𝑡
𝒙𝑡𝒙⊤
𝑡),(117)
and so:
𝑊𝑡+1 =(∇ 𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡,𝒙𝑡)𝒙⊤
𝑡 +𝜂𝑡𝑊𝑡) 1
𝜂𝑡
(𝐼− 1
𝜆2+𝜂𝑡
𝒙𝑡𝒙⊤
𝑡)(118)
⇒𝑊 𝑡+1 =𝑊𝑡

𝐼− 1
𝜆2+𝜂𝑡
𝒙𝑡𝒙⊤
𝑡

+ 1
𝜂𝑡
∇𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡,𝒙𝑡)𝒙⊤
𝑡 − 1
𝜆2𝜂𝑡+𝜂 2
𝑡
∇𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡,𝒙𝑡)𝒙⊤
𝑡 𝒙𝑡𝒙⊤
𝑡
|                                   {z                                   }
𝜆
𝜆2𝜂𝑡+𝜂2𝑡
∇𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡,𝒙𝑡)𝒙⊤
𝑡
(119)
⇒𝑊 𝑡+1 =𝑊𝑡

𝐼− 1
𝜆2+𝜂𝑡
𝒙𝑡𝒙⊤
𝑡

−
 𝜆
𝜆2𝜂𝑡+𝜂 2
𝑡
− 1
𝜂𝑡

∇𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡,𝒙𝑡)𝒙⊤
𝑡 (120)
⇒𝑊 𝑡+1 =𝑊𝑡
 𝐼−𝛼 𝑡𝒙𝑡𝒙⊤
𝑡
−𝛽∇ 𝑦𝑡L(𝑊𝑡,𝒙𝑡)𝒙⊤
𝑡 (121)
52